[FONTE: Blue Peace Investing Brief 2019.txt]

Blue Peace Investors Brief: A 
New Way of Impact Investing

---

The Challenge 
The world is not on track to meet the greenhouse 
gas emissions’ “turning point” required to avoid 
catastrophic impacts due to climate change. At the 
same time, awareness is growing that failure to 
reach the aspirational goal under the Paris Agree­
ment (PA) of limiting global warming to 1.5°C in­
crease would severely jeopardise the achievement 
of the United Nations’ Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs), leading to increased inequalities, con­
flicts and humanitarian catastrophes. At the same 
time, growing global population, fast urbanization 
and a rising middle class around the world has re­
sulted in higher levels of consumption. A level of 
consumption that in turn puts pressure on the in­
dustrial and social production cycles of food, ener­
gy, water, and other natural forms of capital. Man­
aging these global challenges requires far-reaching 
and unprecedented changes in many aspects of 
our societies. However, the biggest changes are re­
quired in the way our economic systems function, 
currently causing high greenhouse gas emissions, 
and determining the supply chains, which provide 
the basic services and goods for the well-being of 
the populations. 
Luckily enough, the global community has already 
agreed on the ultimate goal as to how to manage 
the above challenges. This universally agreed-upon 
goal is well described in the ambitious UN Agen­
da 2030 and in the Paris Agreement. However, the 
path to achieve the goal will require new forms of 
global partnerships and investment of resources 
from both private and public sectors. Investors con­
tribute to a crucial part in supporting the transition 
of the world economy from the current carbon-de­
pleting ways of production to the envisioned in­
clusive carbon-neutral economy. Many investors 
now understand, especially those who invest with 
a long-term vision, that investments need to gen­
erate both financial returns and positive impact, 
striving for inclusiveness and sustainability. The 
path to an inclusive and sustainable carbon-neutral 
economy needs the re-organization of both the 
production and consumption cycles of private and 
public goods. Investments, necessary to develop 
economies are a powerful tool to drive the modes 
of production and consumption.
The Blue Peace initiative, recognising this lever­
aging power, is advocating a new model of invest­
ment with  the investor community that will allow 
the creation of a new market place advancing the 
goal of attaining a carbon-neutral economy. Spe­
cifically, Blue Peace advocates for investments to 
be re-directed to two areas that will have a trans­
formative impact: at transboundary regional level, 
and at local municipality level. Natural capital such 
as atmospheric carbon or water bodies etc. are 
not confined to administrative borders. However, 
these same resources, natural capita, are usually 
managed within administrative systems and States, 
under sovereign principles. At the same time, the 
majority of the consumption and production cycles 
are done within household or industrial structures, 
both of which are located at the level of municipal­
ities. In addition, current financial markets, public 
investment and private capital responds to sectoral 
and administrative approaches defined by the sov­
ereign states and therefore are missing the neces­
sary common strategic orientation of an evolving 
society. They are unable to respond to the trans­
boundary, trans-sectoral and sub-national realities 
which are required to reach the SDGs. The present 
Blue Peace financing initiative is proposing new fi­
nancing instruments to overcome this challenge.
2

---

Water as Entry Point for Impact 
Investing across Multiple Sectors 
Water is one of the most important resources on 
the planet. Indispensable for life, water has no sub­
stitute. It is also one of the main inputs across many 
industrial processes, for households, and other 
sectors of the real economy. Long-term access to 
water is as such a necessity for human well-being 
and economic development. Furthermore, a recent 
UN-Water Analytical Brief shows how SDG 6 links 
across all the other 16 SDGs: “There is a dynamic, 
two-way interdependence between Goal 6 targets 
and every other Goal. It is vital that the interlink­
ages are well understood and managed to achieve 
the social, economic and environmental dimen­
sions of the 2030 Agenda”1. 
In accordance with this statement, the Blue Peace 
approach is suggesting that water is the perfect 
entry point and lever to develop new opportunities 
for Impact Investments in multiple sectors, contrib­
uting to all SDGs and therefore to the sustainable 
and economic development of many sectors and 
countries. However, current investment plans and 
strategies do not take into account the intrinsic val­
ue of water in its cross-sectoral, transboundary na­
ture. Furthermore, water resources are finite, and in 
many areas, water is becoming increasingly scarce, 
not the least due to climate change and a lack of 
proper sustainable management. In a market econ­
omy, the allocation of scarce natural resources 
(such as coal, oil, fish, crops, and timber) is typically 
determined by markets forces. However, water re­
sources have a number of unique characteristics for 
which traditional market mechanisms cannot pro­
vide efficient and equitable allocations. Therefore, 
water cannot and should not be traded as a simple 
economic commodity. What should be traded are 
the public goods and assets derived from water. 
The new understanding of a sustainable economy 
requires making sure that water will be available 
in sufficient quality and quantity both at the entry 
and exit point of the production cycle, leading to a 
circular economy. However, the way financing cur­
1	 http://www.unwater.org/publications/water-sanitation-in­
terlinkages-across-2030-agenda-sustainable-development/ , 
page 6.
rently approaches water and related investments is 
overly administrative, country-based and sectoral. 
This approach is not taking into account a long-
term availability of water both in terms of quan­
tity and quality, and therefore is often inefficient 
(see Figure 1). Moreover, the standard sectoral 
approach leads almost inevitably to oversized and 
overly costly infrastructures, missing synergistic op­
portunities as development and investment plans 
are not analysed and negotiated from multi-secto­
rial perspectives balancing the different interests2.  
2	 We refer here to the perspectives and interests of different 
sectors and stakeholders such as energy, agriculture, indus­
try, households, fishery but also the private sector, govern­
ments, citizens etc. 
 
 
Figure 1: Water Management in Silos. © Stéphane Kluser (Komplo)
3

---

The Blue Peace Financing Initiative
The cooperative and multisectoral approach of the 
Blue Peace concept is more relevant than ever at 
a time when population growth, rapid urbaniza­
tion and industrial expansion are putting more and 
more pressure on water supplies. This pressure is 
growing even faster due to the rising impact of cli­
mate change. It is time to start investing in water 
in a smarter way, through a more holistic multi­
sectoral and transboundary approach. The aim of 
the Blue Peace Financing Initiative therefore is to 
introduce a way of financing transboundary and 
multisectoral water cooperation by creating new 
ways to access financial capital. Financial investors 
can profit from such investment plans (“Blue Peace 
masterplans”)3 which can contribute to reducing 
risks, therefore providing a better risk-return pro­
file for their portfolios. Transboundary (water) or­
ganizations and municipalities in both developed 
and developing countries, on the other hand, can 
subsequently have an easier access to finance. An 
active negotiation by all interested parties based on 
the reality of water availability leads automatically 
to more effective and financially efficient invest­
ment programs, with reduced tensions or risks of 
activating conflicts driven by diverging interests. 
Currently, this potential is not understood and 
therefore not valued by financial investors. 
The main goal is to have a commercial methodolo­
gy that is replicable and scalable, while not replac­
ing any kind of existing financial agreements and 
public resources, but rather by creating new ways 
to access financial capital. The Blue Peace Financing 
Initiative is going to provide incentives to investors 
to understand the benefits of investing in water-re­
lated assets and goods as an asset class that cut 
across multiple sectors and are anchored in a joint 
political agreement. 
3	 The multisectoral and transboundary joint investment plans 
will bundle together and assess different projects using 
water as an entry point at the basin level (e.g. projects using 
water for energy, household consumption, for navigation, 
for food and agricultural production, for tourism or ecosys­
tem services etc.); these investment plans make it possible 
to achieve returns on investments.  The multi-sectoral 
investment plans include infrastructure investments but also 
soft investments required for a service provision such as 
electricity and drinking water. It will be based on a shared 
ownership and benefits, pre-negotiated and approved by 
authorities, thus creating an enhanced accountability. 
The Blue Peace concept builds on the postulate that instead of being a 
factor of risk, water can be a formidable tool for cooperation between 
countries and between sectors.  It is becoming a growing global move­
ment aiming at developing a culture of peace and fostering the preser­
vation of the precious freshwater resources, while achieving equitable 
and sustainable use of water across boundaries, sectors and genera­
tions. It advocates for new, creative and innovative thinking over how to 
use and manage water resources, including new ways of impact invest­
ing. It promotes ideas and solutions from international organizations, 
governmental agencies, businesses and start-ups, NGOs, research insti­
tutes, think-tanks, artists, young people. .
The Blue Peace Production Cycle. © Stéphane Kluser (Komplo)
4

---

The Financial Instrument: 
Blue Peace Bonds
The financial instrument required for this new kind 
of Impact Investing will blend both public and 
private investments into one and shall be called 
Blue Peace Bond. The public funds will be used 
for risk-mitigation and to attract private funds to 
achieve total financing (blended finance). Invest­
ment plans bundling together projects from dif­
ferent sectors using water as an entry point (“Blue 
Peace Masterplans”) will be used to raise these 
bonds. Since the majority of the bonds will be is­
sued by a municipality or a Transboundary (water) 
Organization, these bonds will be backed by the 
cashflows of the underlying projects. Furthermore, 
they will be catalytic in matching the cashflows of 
projects to the repayment of bonds - a process that 
will increase the accountability of water resource 
management. The bonds can take different struc­
tures based on the revenue expectations of a spe­
cific masterplan, and therefore be flexible to fully 
match the cashflows generated by the projects. 
The structure of the Blue Peace Bonds will include 
a credit risk enhancement mechanism, for exam­
ple from a reputable insurance company. The credit 
enhancement will be subsidized by public funds to 
increase the marketability of the Blue Peace Bonds 
for private investors. The Blue Peace Bonds can be 
marketed to both local investors (e.g. local pension 
funds, insurance companies, corporates, banks, in­
dividual savers etc.) and to international investors, 
such as asset managers. A Trust fund will be creat­
ed to manage and support the different Blue Peace 
Bond issuers. The Blue Peace Trust will support the 
issuers on two fronts: by providing capacity build­
ing and supporting the process of issuing. The trust 
will among others support bond issuance through 
political support, advocacy, impact measurement 
and management of the branding mechanism of 
Blue Peace.
Development of a New 
Marketplace
Financial markets normally work well for individ­
ual states and big companies. Municipalities and 
Transboundary (Water) Organizations have more 
difficulty in accessing finance for development 
purposes. The creation of a new market and intro­
duction of financial instruments that allow blend­
ing of public funds with the private sector funds 
to finance sustainable water-related projects will 
unlock capital for municipalities and Transbound­
ary (Water) Organizations. Access to such capital 
will provide new and larger private-based resourc­
es for development projects in line with the SDGs. 
Once the financial market has started to co-invest 
in water-related livelihood assets and public goods, 
investments through capital markets would open a 
new window on sustainable development financ­
ing. It is with this aim that the Blue Peace Finance 
Initiative will support the development of a new 
market using water as an entry point and lever to 
produce livelihood assets in a sustainable manner 
fostering peace and economic development.
5

---

8 REASONS TO INVEST IN PEACE THROUGH WATER
1.	 It is about investing in sustainable impact: There is a growing demand for impact investing1. This 
proposed new way of financing is actually impact investing: it enables the investor to generate positive, 
measurable social and environmental impact alongside a financial return. 
2.	 The risk return profile: It is an investment with a stable risk-return profile, since there are a number of 
de-risking factors and mechanisms.
3.	 It is a long-term investment: Long-term investments face lower volatility and therefore are less risky. 
Long-term investments often also provide tax advantages and have lower transactions costs. 
4.	 It is a Multisectoral investment: Where the interests of water, energy, mobility, industrial production, 
food and natural ecosystems are balanced, it is possible to achieve higher returns on investments. Mul­
ti-sectoral dialogue and negotiation are key to maximizing benefits for all stakeholders and actors. Since 
these multisectoral investments are based on pre-negotiated joint investment plans, they have consi­
dered the different needs and interests, and therefore reduce the risk of tensions between the different 
actors and herewith provide an improved risk-return profile. Furthermore, multisectoral investments 
are less risky because of the diversified risk.
5.	 It is Blended Finance: Blended finance is about coupling public and private as well as domestic and 
international resources. In blended financial arrangements, public finance, sometimes combined with 
philanthropic capital, take over an important part of the risk mitigation to allow private investors to step 
in later. This strategy helps improve the risk-return profile of investments and provide more security for 
the private investors.  
6.	 It is transboundary investment: Investing in transboundary (water) projects incentivizes trans­
boundary cooperation and promotes peace in the region. This in turn reduces the risk again through 
diversification (simply by having more than one country engaged in the project) and improves the enab­
ling environment for other projects to invest in the region, allowing economic growth and sustainable 
development. 
7.	 Investing in Water for sustainable economic development and creating shared benefits: it is expected 
that water will in the future become more valuable than oil, as rising demand from people, industries 
and agriculture will apply increasing pressure on the already scarce water supplies worldwide2. To assu­
re long-term returns on investments in goods and services that depend on water availability, water has to 
be preserved in quantity and quality both at the entry and exit point of the production systems. It implies 
making sure that water is managed responsibly and traded accordingly.
8.	 First Mover Advantage: Since we are talking about a new financing mechanism, there will be the first 
mover advantage for any investor investing at this stage of the process. Being first will allow these inves­
tors to be perceived as an innovator in financing the SDGs. 
The Blue Peace Financing initiative values peaceful agreements leading to shared benefits and basin-wide 
sustainable economic development and peaceful societies.
1	
 https://www.motif.com/blog/millennials-increasing-demand-impact-investing 
2	
 https://www.thedailystar.net/news/lifestyle/perspective/water-the-new-oil-1622248 
6
Unlocking Public and Private 
Finance for the Poor
Layout: Mark Manion, Commusication Arts
March 2019