[FONTE: Brief Global 2018_3 Blue Peace En - Reseau-global brief-Blue Peace-2018_SDC_EN.txt]

GLOBAL 
BRIEF
GLOBAL BRIEF 3/2018 
1
BLUE PEACE: AN IDEAL TURNS 
INTO AN INTERNATIONAL 
MOVEMENT
It took just a few years for the Blue Peace initiative to become a 
recognised international movement. Everyone agrees that available 
water resources must be managed wisely to reduce the risks of conﬂict. 
When it comes to water access, the SDC is supporting both cross-
border cooperation mechanisms and national dialogue platforms.
“If we succeed together, we will look back 
on 2017 as the year in which the notion of 
water as an asset for peace was turned into 
a widespread mechanism of diplomacy.” 
Danilo Türk, former president of the Re-
public of Slovenia, highlights the historical 
importance of the September 2017 publi-
cation of an international report promoting 
the peaceful management of water resourc-
es. For some people, this report embodies 
the breakthroughof the Blue Peace initiative 
launched by Switzerland in 2010.
This initiative is based on the idea that man-
aging water resources around the world 
fairly and efﬁciently can help to achieve sus-
tainable peace. 
“Since water ‘connects’ individuals and 
groups of people, we concluded that the 
best solution would be based on coopera-
tion mechanisms that are in everyone’s in-
terest,” says Johan Gély, who runs the SDC’s 
Global Programme Water. Such a coopera-
tive approach is more relevant than ever at 
a time when population growth and indus-
trial expansion are putting more and more 
pressure on water supplies, whereas water is 
often very poorly recycled, and ecosystems 
are being disrupted by the impact of climate 
The SDC relies on the unifying movement “Blue Peace” in its activities at international and local
level. Peaceful water management requires the involvement of a variety of actors. © SDC
Editorial
Water brings everyone together on our
planet called blue. We value this essential
resource so highly because of its scarcity
and uneven quality. Is it destined to be a
source of endless conﬂict, as some people
fear? Or will it allow dialogue and cooper-
ation – the foundations for peaceful socie-
ties – to take root?
The Swiss Agency for Development and
Cooperation (SDC) ﬁrmly believes in the
latter scenario, advocating a positive ap-
proach to water issues over the past years.
It boldly launched an international move-
ment called Blue Peace, inspired by the
understanding that countries that active-
ly work together to resolve water-related
concerns do not go to war with each other.
That same observation underpinned the
key role played by Switzerland in having
cross-border cooperation included in the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
as part of Goal 6, which addresses water is-
sues.
Water resources can be highly contentious.
But these tensions can be defused by creat-
ing a space for dialogue between countries,
or between communities and industrial
groups, for example. And the SDC is not
alone in this belief. Many private compa-
nies and research institutes, not to men-
tion young people, have joined the effort.
This shows that the goals of sustainable
development and sustainable peace are
both within reach.
Happy reading!
Tatjana von Steiger
Deputy Assistant Director General, SDC,
Global Cooperation
3/2018
Global Cooperation Department
GLOBAL PROGRAMME WATER

---

GLOBAL BRIEF 3/2018 
2
change. Today, nearly 3.5 billion people lack 
sufﬁcient drinking water. In 2017, as in pre-
vious years, water-related crises have been 
identiﬁed among the top ﬁve long-term 
threats to our planet, according to the Glob-
al Risks Report published by the World Eco-
nomic Forum. 
Switzerland has emerged as a leader in this 
area, drawing on its extensive hands-on ex-
perience (see pages 2, 3 and 4). In less than 
a decade, it has turned Blue Peace into a uni-
fying movement. “In the many shared water 
management projects that it develops and 
funds around the world, Switzerland seeks 
to ensure everyone’s voice is heard, from vil-
lagers to ministers, women, young people, 
researchers and companies looking for in-
vestment opportunities,” says Nadia Benani, 
programme ofﬁcer at the SDC. While prob-
lems vary from one situation to the next, dia-
logue is always the solution. “How the water 
from a river or lake is used can sow discord, 
yet steps can be taken to forestall this. Simply 
bringing people with competing water inter-
ests together can prevent conﬂict in other 
areas.”
International visibility
Switzerland’s expertise in water manage-
ment, and its long-standing policy of joining 
forces with other countries such as Germany, 
Italy and France, are a major factor in the suc-
cess of the Blue Peace movement. In 2015, 
the same year that the call for “integrated 
water resources management” was includ-
ed in the 2030 Agenda, Switzerland helped 
set up a panel of high-level policy makers 
from 15 countries whose task was to dis-
cuss what “international water cooperation” 
meant and ways it could be achieved. Panel 
Chairman Danilo Türk had the honour of pre-
senting the aforementioned report in Gene-
va, New York and Brasilia (where the latest 
World Water Forum was held).
Countries around the world embraced the 
idea that water resources could be peacefully 
managed. The link between water and peace 
was also taken over in the recommendations 
issued by the United Nations’ and the World 
Bank’s High-Level Panel on Water.
According to Benani, Switzerland “supports 
all of the observations and goals set forth 
in the report.” In reality, the SDC’s projects 
already feature some of the panel’s recom-
mendations, such as encouraging private 
sector investments in cross-border facilities, 
strengthening water diplomacy, providing 
open access to reliable water data and sys-
tematically protecting water-related infra-
structure in times of conﬂict.
> For more informatio read: 
«A Matter of Survival»
Appealing for cross-border cooperation
The SDC, through its active support for the Convention on the Protection and Use of Trans-
boundary Watercourses and International Lakes (the “Water Convention”), has helped forge 
new paradigms of cross-border cooperation. Its strong advocacy for joint water management 
results from a detailed analysis of beneﬁts of the countries that lie along the Drina River (Bos-
nia, Serbia and Montenegro), the Cubango-Okavango River Basin (Angola, Botswana and 
Namibia) and the Sio-Malaba-Malakisi River Basin (Kenya and Uganda). Their willingness to 
work together was an economic, social and environmental boon for these countries as well as 
a factor of peace and security. The Water Convention was originally negotiated by the United 
Nations Economic Commission for Europe, and serves nowadays as international guidelines. 
Negotiated water sharing
Four countries – Chad, Cameroon, Nigeria and Niger – have direct access to Lake Chad. Mil-
lions of farmers and breeders depend on its water, yet the lake’s surface area has shrunk by 
80 per cent since 1960. The Central African Republic and Libya may be farther away, but they 
too have an interest in the resources provided by this lake. The BRIDGE project, run by the 
International Union for Conservation of Nature and funded by Switzerland, has developed, 
with the member states of the Lake Chad Basin Commission detailed hydrological maps. They 
are carefully analysed to identify the effects of climate change. Further down the line, local 
communities can use them to plan their activities in accordance with the volume of water 
available to them.
THE BLUE PEACE IDEAL IN ACTION

---

GLOBAL BRIEF 3/2018 
3
Three questions for... Joyce Mendes
JOYCE MENDES, 24 years old, is a local activist and member of the World
Youth Parliament for Water, which is supported by the SDC.
Joyce, how did you become active in
cross-border cooperation between
Brazil, Paraguay and Argentina?
I lived in various countries with my par-
ents before they decided to move to Foz
de Iguazu, a Brazilian city that sits across
the Paraná and Iguazu Rivers from Para-
guay and Argentina. Five years ago, when
I started university, I had several ideas
for water-related projects. It hit me like
a bombshell! I helped to set up a variety
of youth groups in the region, thinking:
‘Young people like me need to do some-
thing to protect our shared ecosystems.’
Has the World Youth Parliament for
Water been beneﬁcial for your projects?
Deﬁnitely, it helps us to ﬁnd out what’s
going on elsewhere. It’s a real source of
inspiration. After one particular session
of Parliament, I contacted local communi-
ties to suggest they try producing biogas.
That project is part of a regional initiative
aimed at ‘zero waste’. River pollution is a
cross-border issue by deﬁnition, so we try
to inﬂuence relevant public regulations
by organising open workshops where we
look at water and soil samples.
Do you think that young people around
the world view water and water-
related priorities the same way?
On one hand, yes. We all want to achieve
peace, and this means thinking about
how we treat each other. That said, every
country and every region has its own his-
tory. In the Paraná Basin, for example, the
awful War of the Triple Alliance 150 years
ago still haunts people. More recently,
these countries have signed several co-
operation agreements. Brazil and Para-
guay jointly operate a hydroelectric power
plant. But it’s up to us, young people, to pay
attention to these arrangements and at-
tempt to build on them.
Joyce Mendes
Sustainably managing a scarce resource
The Middle East is an arid region where available water resources must be managed in a long-
term perspective. In Jordan, the situation has deteriorated following the inﬂux of millions of 
refugees in the northern part of the country. The rights to the waters of the Yarmouk River, 
which separates Syria and Jordan, are a long-standing source of contention. Over the past 
two years, the SDC overcame difﬁcult circumstances to prepare a rigorous hydrological and 
political study that now serves as a useful model when it comes to sharing transboundary 
water resources. 
Water diplomacy
As part of the Swiss-led Blue Peace Central Asia initiative, ﬁve countries from this region 
– which is of strategic interest for Switzerland in several respects – are teaming up on this 
cross-border effort (see article on page 4).
Preserving aquifers
In the border area between Namibia, South Africa and Botswana, water represents an un-
derground challenge. A large number of people depend on the Stampriet Aquifer for their 
existence. For now, this aquifer is not in a situation of overuse or pollution. But given local 
population growth, that could change quickly. Switzerland is funding a UNESCO-run project 
to generate and collect hydrogeological data in an effort to bolster each country’s responsi-
bility when it comes to planning its water needs and playing its part in sustainably managing 
the water table.

---

GLOBAL BRIEF 3/2018 
4
Imprint
Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation
SDC, Global Cooperation Department
Freiburgstrasse 130, CH-3003 Berne
deza@eda.admin.ch, www.fdfa.admin.ch/sdc
 
This publication is also available in German, French 
and Italian.
A good example of South-South cooperation:
ten high-level ofﬁcials from Central Asia saw
ﬁrst-hand how Senegal, Mauritania, Mali and
Guinea work together to manage the Senegal
River Basin. © SDC
Blue Peace Central Asia: the impact of water diplomacy
Central Asia is second only to the Middle 
East in terms of where Switzerland active-
ly promotes water diplomacy in support of 
cross-border water cooperation under the 
Blue Peace initiative. The challenge is formi-
dable: to provide sustainable and safe water 
access to the 60 million people living in Ka-
zakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmeni-
stan and Uzbekistan.
This region more closely resembles Swit-
zerland in its geology – with glaciers, fertile 
plains, long rivers and lakes that sometimes 
straddle national borders – than in its insti-
tutions. “Until recently, interstate coopera-
tion was limited to water-sharing formulas 
inherited from the Soviet era,” says Michel 
Mordasini, Switzerland’s Special Envoy for 
Water in Central Asia. “The idea of exploring 
what could be done with this water through 
a joint effort never made it to the agenda.” 
That gave Switzerland an opening, since it 
could draw on a long history of cooperating 
with neighbouring countries on sustainably 
managing water sources and preventing dis-
asters.
As such, Switzerland was able to bring to-
gether representatives of the ﬁve Central 
Asian countries in Basel in 2014, for an initial 
meeting to discuss integrated water resourc-
es management. In offering its water diplo-
macy services, Switzerland is also able to 
bring to the table its extensive experience in 
the region gained over the course of 25 years 
of technical cooperation in the water sector.
Applying best practices from 
West Africa  
Since then, high-level “technical dialogues” 
and study trips have taken place regular-
ly. The last trip brought a delegation of ten 
ofﬁcials from Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Ta-
jikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan to 
Dakar, to look at how Senegal, Mauritania, 
Mali and Guinea work together at managing 
the shared Senegal River. The visitors took a 
special interest in the fair and equitable distri-
bution of the costs and revenues associated 
with river water use, and how each water in-
frastructure is managed by individual private 
companies.
In reality, “Central Asian countries are not 
starting from square one,” points out Mor-
dasini, who mentions the International Fund 
for Saving the Aral Sea, a long-standing co-
operation framework. Several other projects 
supported by the SDC or by the Swiss State 
Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO) are 
also making a difference. Kyrgyzstan and Ka-
zakhstan have set up a system of automatic 
water-ﬂow measurements for the Chu and 
Talas Rivers, which means that they can base 
their discussions on reliable and transparent 
data. In Osh, Kyrgyzstan’s second-largest 
city, high-tech wastewater treatment is a 
boon for the Uzbek community living on the 
other side of the border. In another example, 
the SDC supported a partnership between 
glaciologists from the University of Fribourg 
and Uzbek, Kyrgyz and Tajik researchers 
to develop models for the efﬁcient use of 
mountain water. Glaciers in Central Asia – 
like elsewhere in the world – are melting as 
a result of climate change and pose real dan-
gers. Transnational alert systems were thus 
created in order to warn people of ﬂooding 
and landslides, which are oblivious to bor-
ders.
What does the future hold? According to 
Mordasini, one key challenge will be to 
convince banks active at the regional and in-
ternational levels to provide funding for ma-
jor transboundary projects at a regional level 
rather than by country. Here again, Switzer-
land “is a thought leader”. But new ways 
of thinking will require a new generation of 
public ofﬁcials and activists. Switzerland is 
working on that too. By the end of this year, 
it will create a regional network of young 
professionals keen on experiencing life in a 
neighbouring country. It is all about planting 
the seeds of cross-border solidarity.