22/2013
Discussion Paper
A Resolution for a Quiet Revolution
Taking the United Nations to Sustainable 
Development ‘Beyond Aid’
Pio Wennubst
Timo Mahn

---



---

A resolution for a quiet revolution 
Taking the United Nations to sustainable  
development ‘beyond aid’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pio Wennubst 
Timo Mahn 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bonn, New York 2013

---

Discussion Paper / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik 
ISSN 1860-0441 
Die deutsche Nationalbibliothek verzeichnet diese Publikation in der Deutschen Nationalbibliografie; detail-
lierte bibliografische Daten sind im Internet über http://dnb.d-nb.de abrufbar. 
The Deutsche Nationalbibliothek lists this publication in the Deutsche Nationalbibliografie; detailed 
bibliographic data is available in the Internet at http://dnb.d-nb.de. 
ISBN 978-3-88985-603-6 
Pio Wennubst is the team head for humanitarian and development affairs at the Permanent Representa-
tion of Switzerland to the United Nations in New York. While he was managing a Swiss chemical 
company in Africa, an eye-opening experience triggered a major career change. Mr Wennubst then 
studied agro-economics at the University of Bologna and comparative rural development at INA in 
Paris before joining the Swiss Federal Department of Foreign Affairs. He further expanded his know-
how in the health and financial sectors while working as a development practitioner. He has broad ex-
perience in research, teaching, policy dialogue, negotiations and coaching, and has acquired sectoral 
expertise in public expenditure management and private-sector development. 
Timo Mahn is a research fellow in the Bi- und Multilateral Development Cooperation department of 
the German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE). He studied polit-
ical science at the Free University of Berlin and international development management at George 
Washington University in Washington, D.C. Mr Mahn worked for the World Bank, KFW, the German 
development bank and the German Embassy in Kigali before joining the DIE. In addition to the United 
Nations, his research interests include international organizations, public financial management, aid 
modalities and aid architecture. 
E-mail:  
timo.mahn@die-gdi.de 
Disclaimer 
The views expressed here are solely those of the authors. 
© Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik gGmbH 
Tulpenfeld 6, 53113 Bonn 
 +49 (0)228 94927-0 
 +49 (0)228 94927-130 
E-Mail: die@die-gdi.de 
www.die-gdi.de

---

Authors’ preface 
The idea to write this discussion paper was largely triggered by two events in the fall of 
2012. The United Nations (UN) Conference on Sustainable Development (‘Rio+20’) had 
just adopted its outcome document in Rio de Janeiro, while in New York UN Member 
States were in the middle of the Quadrennial Comprehensive Policy Review (QCPR) pro-
cess that culminated in the QCPR Resolution of 2012, in December.  
This paper seeks to make an informed contribution to the Member States’ debate. Need-
less to say, many limitations are associated with such an endeavour, among them, timing. 
At the time of publication, numerous reform processes – in particular that for the post–
2015 agenda – were ongoing, whose outcomes we cannot predict and which at times have 
required us to keep our argument more general. However, this proposal is fully in line 
with the ongoing discussions. 
For purposes of full disclosure: Pio Wennubst previously served as facilitator for negotiat-
ing the QCPR resolution at the Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the United Nations. 
To reflect on that experience, he spent 15 days in March/April 2013 as a guest researcher 
at the German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE), 
where co-author Timo Mahn works as a research fellow in a project about the UN Devel-
opment System (UNDS). This discussion paper results from our joint research effort and 
expresses our own views.  
Bonn and New York, August 2013   
 
 
      Pio Wennubst / Timo Mahn

---



---

Contents 
Abbreviations 
Executive summary 
1 
1 
Introduction 
5 
2 
The QCPR as a system-wide strategy 
6 
2.1 
The basic set-up and evolution from the TCPR to the QCPR 
6 
3 
‘Sustainable development’ as a system-wide mandate 
9 
3.1 
Policy implications for the UNDS 
10 
3.2 
The quest for a system-wide guiding mandate 
14 
4 
A ‘quiet revolution’ towards a cohesive UNDS 
17 
4.1 
The UNDS and system-wide cohesion 
17 
4.2 
A system-wide message from Member States 
19 
4.3 
Elements of the quiet revolution 
21 
4.3.1 
Oversight 
23 
4.3.2 
Management 
25 
4.3.3 
Delegation of authority 
26 
4.3.4 
Accountable partnerships 
28 
4.3.5 
The harmonization of business practices 
29 
5 
System-wide funding ‘beyond aid’ 
30 
5.1 
The system-wide funding dilemma 
31 
5.2 
Proposal for a system-wide funding mechanism 
33 
6 
Conclusions 
34 
6.1 
A feasible evolution in the QCPR cycle 
35 
6.2 
Outlook 
37 
Bibliography 
39

---

Annex  
43 
Annex 1: 
Categorization – addressees of CPR resolutions 
45 
Annex 2:   
UNDS entities 
50 
Figures 
Figure 1: 
Addressees of TCPR/QCPR resolutions by different actors 
20 
Figure 2:   
A quiet revolution in the UNDS 
22 
Figure 3:   
The QCPR cycle 
36 
Tables 
Table 1:  
The role of the UNDS in the new paradigm 
14 
Table 2:  
The evolution of addressees of TCPR/QCPR resolutions over time 
20 
Boxes 
Box 1: 
QCPR Basics 
7 
Box 2:  
 
Complex negotiations and the case of the 2012 QCPR Resolution 
8 
Box 3:  
 
‘Sustainable development’ in practice 
12 
Box 4:  
 
Initiatives of the Secretary-General 
29 
Box 5:  
 Support for countries in transition under the system-wide funding  
mechanism 
34

---

Abbreviations 
CEB 
Chief Executives Board for Cooperation 
CPC 
Committee for Programme and Coordination 
CPR 
Comprehensive Policy Review 
DaO 
Delivering as One 
DESA 
Department of Economic and Social Affairs 
DIE 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik  
DOCO 
UN Development Operations Coordination Office 
ECOSOC 
Economic and Social Council 
ERP 
Enterprise Resource Planning 
GA 
General Assembly 
GNH 
Gross National Happiness  
HLCM 
High-level Committee on Management 
HLCP 
High-level Committee on Programmes 
HLM 
high-level meeting 
HLPF 
High-level Political Forum 
ICT 
Information and Communications Technology 
JIU 
Joint Inspection Unit 
MDG 
Millennium Development Goals 
ODA 
official development assistance 
OESC 
Office for ECOSOC Support and Coordination 
OP 
operational paragraph 
PGA 
President of the UN General Assembly 
QCPR 
Quadrennial Comprehensive Policy Review 
RC 
resident coordinator 
SDG 
Sustainable Development Goals 
SG 
Secretary-General 
TCPR 
Triennial Comprehensive Policy Review 
UN 
United Nations 
UNDAF 
United Nations Development Assistance Framework 
UNDG 
United Nations Development Group  
UNDP 
United Nations Development Programme 
UNDS 
United Nations development system 
UNITAR 
United Nations Institute for Training and Research 
UN Women United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women

---



---

A resolution for a quiet revolution 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
1 
Executive summary 
Introduction 
Taking the Quadrennial Comprehensive Policy Review (QCPR) as a starting point, this 
paper contributes to the broader debate about the future of the United Nations development 
system (UNDS). The General Assembly (GA) conducts the QCPR every four years to  
evaluate the UNDS’s effectiveness and efficiency and provide policy guidance for the 
whole system. It then produces a negotiated resolution outlining how the UNDS should 
function. This paper suggests how the QCPR could realise a ‘quiet revolution’ using fun-
damental yet achievable reforms to instill a system-wide perspective in the UNDS. The aim 
is to align the UNDS with the requirements after the Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs) expire in 2015, when the new framework will be oriented around the Sustainable 
Development Agenda. It responds to four questions: 
 
What is the future role of the UNDS? 
 
How will the system function, and in which form? 
 
What means are needed to fulfil this role? 
 
What process must be followed to implement this proposal?  
The QCPR as a system-wide strategy 
The QCPR has evolved into a key vehicle for making system-wide reforms. It produces the 
only resolution that addresses the whole system instead of just the parts, enjoys strong legit-
imacy and garners widespread support. The landmark QCPR Resolution of 2012 is a case in 
point. For some entities, QCPR resolutions are mandatory; for others, adoption is voluntary. 
Since it was first established, the QCPR has come to fulfil three basic functions: a) ensuring 
that the UNDS operates in conformity with Member State priorities, b) serving as a system-
wide monitor of operational activities for development and c) providing policy guidance for 
the UNDS. 
Each QCPR resolution provides policy guidance for UNDS operations – how to conduct 
development cooperation. QCPR resolutions also contain substantial guidance in terms of 
mandates (the what), although most of the system-wide mandate originates elsewhere.  
‘Sustainable development’ as a system-wide mandate 
The Sustainable Development Agenda represents a paradigm shift in global thinking about 
development. In the Rio+20 outcome document, Member States confirmed its crucial im-
portance for the UNDS, but gave no specifics. However, it is possible to identify a number 
of policy implications in the Sustainable Development Agenda: 
 
It is generally applicable in every country – due to the increasingly global nature of 
development challenges. 
 
It calls for action on significantly longer time horizons than in the past. 
 
It requires joint efforts by the public and private sectors as well as by individuals.

---

Pio Wennubst / Timo Mahn 
2 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
 
‘Silo’ approaches and structures are no longer deemed adequate because rapid increas-
es in knowledge-sharing boost interconnectivity and interdependence. 
 
It entails a fundamental transformation of development cooperation going ‘beyond aid’. 
 
Making it operable is mostly a matter of setting and adjusting regulatory frameworks to 
facilitate equitable and sustainable access to livelihood assets for all. 
The UNDS seems to be well positioned to play a key role in implementing the Sustainable 
Development Agenda:  
 
The ‘universal nature’ of UNDS operational activities means it services all countries. 
 
UNDS multilateral collaboration perpetuates joint endeavours over extended periods of 
time, as exemplified by the MDGs.  
 
The UNDS has demonstrated its convening power by forging partnerships and uniting 
different stakeholders to address common challenges. 
 
The greatest asset of the UNDS is its input legitimacy. This creates global acceptability 
for its outputs and services and a unique level of credibility. 
Given this background, it seems appropriate for the UNDS to become the key actor to sup-
port implementation of the new paradigm on the basis of a system-wide mandate to be  
adopted by Member States. Its special role is seen as addressing the ‘normative gap’ in 
practical support for the transition to the new paradigm, especially creating and operational-
izing a normative foundation to guide operations.  
However, the UNDS suffers from having a blurry profile. The UN Charter broadly defines 
the organization’s purpose in development, which has been further defined by Member 
States through the various executive boards of individual UNDS entities. Since 2000, the 
MDGs have served as the overarching UNDS guidepost, although they are not specific to 
the UNDS. QCPR resolutions have evolved as a further source of substantive guidance – 
through practice, not design. There is no organic link to operations because only fragments 
of a negotiated system-wide mandate exist. Therefore, any post–2015 framework will re-
quire a system-wide interpretation explaining the UNDS’s respective purpose and how it 
complements other actors.  
At present, there is strong momentum for change within the UNDS. A key reform process 
includes the new High-level Political Forum (HLPF), which offers opportunities for 
Member States to provide the UNDS with a system-wide mandate to fill gaps left by the 
expiring MDGs. The HLPF could serve to anchor the UN’s specific contribution to im-
plementation of the Sustainable Development Agenda, thus strengthening the link be-
tween mandate and operations. That way, the HLPF would set the boundaries for the 
functioning of the UNDS. 
A ‘quiet revolution’ towards a cohesive UNDS 
As a holistic, transformational and global concept, the Sustainable Development Agenda 
calls for new cohesiveness within the UNDS. The UNDS’s compartmentalised structure is a 
historical consequence of ‘functionalism’. The MDGs also basically followed a ‘functional-
ist’ logic of compartmentalising development challenges in various functional sectors and

---

A resolution for a quiet revolution 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
3 
associated target groups. This was okay for the UNDS’s conventional institutional arrange-
ment, but is not suited for the Sustainable Development Agenda as a system-wide mandate. 
In fact, the lack of coherence may be limiting the system’s ability to exploit crucial syner-
gies that define the Sustainable Development Agenda. In order to maintain the UNDS’s 
prominent role in international development architecture, its normative and operational 
arms may need a much tighter fit.  
The UNDS is transitioning towards greater system-wide cohesion, largely stipulated by the 
High-level Panel on System-wide Coherence in 2006. The current state of affairs could be 
described as a ‘mixed system’ that exhibits elements of system-wide orientation alongside 
agency-specific organizational models. Member States have been using the QCPR as one of 
the main ‘organs’ to advocate system-wide cohesion. Analysis of QCPR resolutions shows 
that nearly 70 per cent of the mandates now concern the whole UNDS; fewer mandates re-
late to individual parts.  
Preparing the UNDS for the paradigm shift to Sustainable Development requires further 
reforms to address the remaining discrepancies. Because various aspects of the UNDS are 
linked, changing operational structures necessitates additional measures to strengthen sys-
tem-wide oversight and mechanisms for management. A quiet revolution of incremental 
reforms to strengthen incentives, transparency and accountability is more feasible than a 
big-bang approach. This entails ECOSOC becoming a centre of oversight and functioning 
as a system-wide executive board within the UNDS. Under the Chief Executive Boards 
for Coordination (CEB), its interlocutor on the inter-agency side, the United Nations De-
velopment Group (UNDG), would assume a system-wide managerial function for 
ECOSOC. The UNDS should step up its efforts to decentralise so as to be able to respond 
to challenges in individual countries, and a revamped UN Development Assistance 
Framework (‘UNDAF+’) should become the main country-level programming tool, ac-
companied by resident coordinators (RCs) with more managerial functions. Contributions 
made by the UNDS and private stakeholders to the UN Secretary-General’s partnership 
initiatives also need to be clarified. Finally, harmonized business practices are needed to 
make the UNDS more cohesive. 
System-wide funding – ‘Beyond Aid’ 
The existing funding system of the UNDS could be characterised as ‘headquarter centred’ 
and ‘agency oriented’, and although suitable for a traditional institutional setting, it appears 
to have reached the limit of structural growth. The QCPR analysis shows Member States 
want demand-driven, systemic funding. The thematic initiatives of the Secretary-General 
(SG), which go beyond the UNDS’s current scope and means, can be seen as an indication 
of the growing demands placed on the UNDS. Establishing a system-wide mandate requires 
strengthening institutions that is optimally achieved through a reformed funding mechanism 
to incentivise coherence and speed up results-delivery. Since a system-wide mandate to 
implement the Sustainable Development Agenda implies varying degrees of support for all 
countries, the funding mechanisms will have to go ‘beyond aid’ to receive additional sup-
port from sources other than the usual official development assistance (ODA). Member 
States must commit themselves to broadening and diversifying the UNDS funding basis 
‘beyond aid’ through innovative means.

---

Pio Wennubst / Timo Mahn 
4 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
Conclusions 
Harmonizing the strategic plans with the four-year QCPR cycle has prepared the UNDS for 
strategic guidance. But there are no means for reconciling a system-wide mandate for the 
UNDS with the functioning and funds for implementation. QCPR resolutions are the right 
vehicle and instrument to give the UNDS a new sense of purpose and direction as it adapts its 
business model from aid to sustainable development. Member States should therefore up-
grade the QCPR to a system-wide strategy, or a ‘QCPR+’ that links the system-wide what to 
the how and the means – similar to a corporate strategy in the business world.

---

A resolution for a quiet revolution 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
5 
1 
Introduction 
Beginning with the Quadrennial Comprehensive Policy Review (QCPR), this paper con-
tributes to the broader debate about the future of the United Nations development system 
(UNDS). It sketches how Member States could use the QCPR to create a ‘quiet revolu-
tion’ within the UNDS to align it with the new requirements after the Millennium Devel-
opment Goals (MDGs) expire in 2015 and are replaced by a new framework guided by the 
Sustainable Development Agenda, which grew out of the Rio and Rio+20 summits.  
The United Nations General Assembly (GA) conducts a QCPR every four years “to eval-
uate the effectiveness and efficiency of the United Nations development system’s support 
[...] in the context of the UN development agenda” and on that basis, “to provide policy 
guidance for the UNDS”.1 In short, Member States use the QCPR resolution to tell the 
UNDS how to function.  
The Sustainable Development Agenda, on the other hand, compels the international com-
munity to adopt an alternative model of development that reconciles economic, social and 
environmental issues so as to not compromise the livelihoods of future generations.  
We consider that both the Sustainable Development Agenda and the QCPR resolutions – 
especially their latest reiteration in 2012 – herald important changes for the future of the 
UNDS. This paper is about establishing what we consider to be the missing link between 
the agenda and the resolutions.  
In the past, Member States used the QCPR to make iterative reforms aimed at instilling a 
system-wide2 perspective in the UNDS, where a largely entity-centred logic had prevailed. 
We refer to this process as the ‘quiet revolution’. The QCPR has become a key platform to 
debate the future of the UNDS, so throughout this paper we refer to the QCPR. Its basic 
set-up, evolution and functioning is outlined in Chapter 2. The remainder of the paper re-
sponds to the following questions: 
 
What is the future role of the UNDS? (Chapter 3) 
 
How will the system function, and in which form? (Chapter 4) 
 
What means are needed to fulfil this role? (Chapter 5) 
 
What process must be followed to implement this proposal? (Chapter 6)   
 
 
                                                           
1  
According to standard usage, the United Nations development system consists of the 37 UN agencies, funds 
and programmes that collectively engage in “operational activities for development”. These ‘operational ac-
tivities’ include both activities primarily aimed at long-term development and short-term humanitarian relief 
measures (compare UNSG 2012a). 
2  
In this paper, the point of reference for the term ‘system-wide’ is the UNDS.

---

Pio Wennubst / Timo Mahn 
6 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
2 
The QCPR as a system-wide strategy 
Past QCPR resolutions have shaped the UNDS in myriad ways, and evolved into an im-
portant way to introduce system-wide reforms because the QCPR is the only (remaining) 
resolution that addresses the whole system and is widely supported by UN members. The 
landmark 2012 QCPR Resolution showed that complex negotiations can be successfully 
completed – and foment a quiet revolution to create system-wide perspective in the UNDS.  
2.1 
The basic set-up and evolution from the TCPR to the QCPR 
The resolutions of the Quadrennial Comprehensive Policy Review of UN operational activi-
ties for development (QCPR) fulfil a key function for the UNDS intergovernmental govern-
ance. The QCPR is the mechanism through which the GA  
“… assesses the effectiveness, efficiency, coherence and impact of UN operational 
activities for development and establishes system-wide policy orientations for the de-
velopment cooperation and country-level modalities of the UN system in response to 
the evolving international development and cooperation environment.” 3 
The review process associated with QCPR resolutions includes a more evaluative and 
backward-looking dimension, as well as a more prescriptive and forward-looking dimen-
sion (UNSG 2012c). A third basic function was outlined in the seminal ‘restructuring’ 
resolution of 1977. While that resolution mandated the Economic and Social Council 
(ECOSOC) to carry out such policy reviews, it defined the scope of these reviews by spec-
ifying “the need for balance, compatibility and conformity with the priorities established 
by the General Assembly for the system as a whole”.4 These sources can be used to sum-
marise the functions of the QCPR resolution as follows:  
 
to ensure compatibility and conformity with the priorities established by the GA, 
 
to serve as a system-wide monitor of operational activities for development, and  
 
to serve as the main instrument for UN Member States to provide policy guidance for 
the UNDS.  
Each QCPR process helps to focus attention – at both the central and field levels – on 
maintaining system-wide compatibility and conformity under GA guidance. QCPR resolu-
tions enjoy high status because only through them can Member States provide system-
wide guidance and address matters that affect and concern the UNDS as a whole. For 
formal reasons, however, QCPR resolutions are only mandatory for those entities that re-
port to the GA,5 while specialized agencies’ adherence is recommended.  
                                                           
3  
Compare the webpage of the UN Secretariat’s Department for Economic and Social Affairs, 
www.un.org/esa/coordination/tcpr.htm (accessed 19 May 2013).  
4  
UN Doc. A/RES/32/197 of 20 Dec. 1977.  
5  
These are: the UNDP (including UNCDF and UNV), UNICEF, UNFPA, WFP, UNHCR, UNODC, 
UNCTAD (including ITC), UNRWA, UN Women, UNEP and UN Habitat, all of which report to the Gen-
eral Assembly; the research and training institutions: UNICRI, UNIDIR, UNITAR, UNRISD, UNSSC and 
UNU; and UNAIDS, UNISDR and UNOPS (UNS 2012). See Annex 2.

---

A resolution for a quiet revolution 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
7 
Each QCPR resolution aims to provide the UNDS with policy guidance for its operations 
(the how of development cooperation). By customary evolution, the QCPR resolutions 
also contain substantial guidance in terms of mandates (the what). The bulk of the system-
wide mandate, however, emanates elsewhere.6  
Traditionally, the Group of 77 (G–77) takes into consideration the Secretary-General’s 
reports and recommendations and produces an initial draft that is negotiated in a series of 
readings, just as in any other negotiation process. QCPR resolutions have weight because 
they represent negotiations in the GA’s Second Committee endorsed by the Plenary Ses-
sion – a sign of Member States’ consensus (compare Box 2).  
Given this function, QCPR resolutions have become one of the most important instru-
ments of UNDS intergovernmental governance. From a system-wide perspective, the doz-
en reviews conducted thus far have had greater impact than most other comparable in-
struments, including the system-wide coherence process that was begun in 2006.  
The QCPR Resolution of 2012 marks the 35th anniversary of the instrument that was con-
ceived by a group of experts to reform the UN's economic and social engagement for the 
Ad Hoc Committee on the Restructuring of the Economic and Social Sectors of the United 
Nations System (created by Member States in 1975). The experts’ report recommended a 
regular Comprehensive Policy Review (CPR) – so QCPR resolutions can be termed a by-
product of the ECOSOC reform process.  
Starting in 1980, the CPR was conducted every three years, leading to a resolution called 
the Triennial Comprehensive Policy Review (TCPR). Then, in 2007, it was decided to 
conduct the exercise every four years in order to align the business cycle with the process 
of developing strategic plans for funds and agencies, and the name was changed to the 
Quadrennial Comprehensive Policy Review (QCPR). Now the strategic plans and their 
four-year perspectives correspond to the QCPR cycle, and the QCPR guides the develop-
ment of strategic plans by the UN system organizations. 
Box 1: 
QCPR Basics 
Binding adherence: QCPR resolutions are binding for 14 funds and programmes, six research and train-
ing institutions and three other entities. 
Voluntary adherence: The resolutions are non-binding for all specialized agencies.  
Functions: System-wide monitoring; ensuring UNDS conformity with General Assembly (GA) priorities; 
providing policy guidance 
Addressee: The UNDS (various parts) 
Draft of the Resolution: Normally prepared by the G–77 
Negotiations: General Assembly Second Committee  
Preparation: Preparatory reports by DESA; procedural resolutions in the GA Second Committee in the 
three years between substantive QCPRs  
Adoption: By consensus 
Period: A substantive QCPR takes place every four years, although mandates (operative clauses) specify 
different timelines for action 
Source: 
Authors 
                                                           
6  
Compare with Section 3.2.

---

Pio Wennubst / Timo Mahn 
8 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
From its modest beginning in 1980, the instrument has evolved into the main instrument 
used by Member States to provide system-wide policy guidance for the UNDS. In the pro-
cess, it has acquired significant legitimacy and clout, largely because it has become stand-
ard practice for Member States to negotiate CPR results in the General Assembly (GA) by 
seeking consensus.  
Given its implications for the whole system, initially the new instrument met with scepti-
cism, including from the governing councils of the specialized agencies in the UNDS. 
Tension between funds and programmes, for whom adherence is mandatory, and special-
ized agencies, which are frequently requested to conform to resolutions but are not legally 
required to do so, continues to this day. The planning cycles of all funds and programmes 
as well as a number of specialized agencies are now aligned with the QCPR cycle, mean-
ing that the negotiation of the strategic plans of all funds and programmes follows the year 
after the QCPR.  
The CPR process was envisioned as a shared responsibility of the GA and ECOSOC, with 
the latter conducting the informed review and the former issuing the respective resolution 
(Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the UN 2013a). As outlined in Resolution 32/197:  
“In discharging these responsibilities, the Economic and Social Council should bear in 
mind the importance of assisting in the preparation of the work of the General Assembly 
in the economic, social and related fields so that the Assembly may give timely and effec-
tive attention to the substantive issues requiring consideration by the Assembly […]. 
The TCPR/QCPR resolutions have greatly evolved over 35 years, not least in terms of the 
convolution of the subject matter, the scope of the issues, the depth of the preparatory pro-
cess and the complexity of the negotiation process (compare Box 2). 
Box 2: Complex negotiations and the case of the 2012 QCPR Resolution7 
As the history of UNDS reforms shows, it is difficult to forge intergovernmental consensus by negotia-
tion. However, the negotiations of the 2012 QCPR Resolutions indicate that challenges can be overcome. 
The 2012 QCPR Resolution8 is considered to have landmark status because the far-reaching changes it 
endorses signal that Member States consider enhancing system-wide coherence to be an important strate-
gy for making the UNDS more relevant and effective. Although misgivings about multilateral action are 
increasing, the QCPR process sends a powerful message that intergovernmental agreement is achievable: 
complex negotiations are possible among 193 Member States.  
A recent assessment of the process showed that thorough preparatory work, a structured and transparent 
negotiation process and proper technical support during negotiations can enable Member States to reach 
broad consensus – even on complex and sensitive issues. Once the 2012 QCPR Resolution had been ne-
gotiated, Member States formulated lessons factors that were crucial for its success. Stakeholders empha-
sised the importance of three key elements for informed decision-making throughout the negotiation pro-
cess: trust, transparency and timely access to technical knowledge. 
 
                                                           
7  
This box draws on a series of internal papers that were prepared by the Permanent Mission of Switzerland to 
the United Nations in the run-up to the QCPR negotiation process, an internal summary of a workshop on 
the lessons learned from the QCPR that was organized by the Friedrich Ebert Foundation in February 2013, 
as well as the facilitator’s personal notes (Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the UN 2013b; Permanent 
Mission of Switzerland to the UN 2013c; Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the UN 2013d; Permanent 
Mission of Switzerland to the UN 2013e; Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the UN 2013f; and Perma-
nent Mission of Switzerland to the UN 2013g).  
8  
UN Doc. GA/RES/67/226 of 22 Jan. 2013.

---

A resolution for a quiet revolution 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
9 
Box 2 (cont.): 
Complex negotiations and the case of the 2012 QCPR Resolution 
The resolution’s preliminary phase lasted nearly a year  with a meticulous preparatory process coordinated 
by the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs (DESA) to deepen understanding of the subjects by 
providing data, overviews of specific country programmes and technical support in the form of studies, 
evaluations, reports and recommendations. A series of training courses held by the UN Institute for Training 
and Research (UNITAR) acquainted participants with the complex QCPR environment and presented new 
information. A series of dialogues on substantive matters was organized by the President of the General 
Assembly (PGA), and a series of very informal breakfasts was held to exchange ideas and introduce prag-
matic perspectives from countries that are confronted by some of the most challenging issues. 
During the negotiation process itself, it was necessary to designate a facilitator to be fully engaged 
throughout the negotiating process and set up a team to create the proper environment for two months of 
stressful, nearly full-time, negotiations. All negotiators agreed that the following factors were crucial for 
ensuring a transparent, informed and trustworthy process: 
– a structured format, 
– windows for specific thematic dialogues in the most challenging areas, 
– preparatory sessions to reduce redundancies and provide background knowledge, and  
– technical support in situ for the first and second readings prior to the negotiations.  
To avoid parallel sessions and ensure adequate preparation time for the negotiators, especially those rep-
resenting groups, the facilitator continuously communicated changes of sequence. QCPR resolutions 
proved too complex to be negotiated in the usual linear fashion. 
It was also necessary to regularly remind participants that no alternative text would be prepared or intro-
duced because the legitimacy of a resolution adopted by Member States to address an operational system is 
directly proportional to its degree of consensus. Space also had to be created for Member States to conduct 
negotiations in a serene atmosphere, strictly respecting the character of closed informal sessions (Permanent 
Mission of Switzerland to the UN 2011). With all the other elements needed for informed decision-making 
in place, at times the legislative and executive functions within the UNDS must be separated.  
Some trivial factors, such as establishing an enabling environment by making rooms available, respecting 
schedules, communicating in a timely manner, providing food and beverages, including for late-evening 
sessions, were also important. All participants appreciated the timely conclusion of the negotiations. 
Some regret was voiced regarding just how far Member States could have gone to reach consensus about 
issues like governance and aid effectiveness, considered by some representatives to have had the potential 
to reach positive conclusions. QCPR resolutions are said to have high legitimacy because they represent a 
collective choice to balance concrete measures that further consolidate and build on previous achieve-
ments with launching potentially volatile reform processes. 
Source: 
Authors 
3 
‘Sustainable development’ as a system-wide mandate 
The Sustainable Development Agenda constitutes a shift of paradigm that implies recogni-
tion of shared responsibilities and global applicability as well as a massive need for both 
intellectual and financial investments – from defining new regulatory frameworks to im-
plementing them. Although they need to be adapted to different contexts, they concern all 
countries and people. The Sustainable Development Agenda extends beyond the usual 
practice of development aid to involve all segments of societies. The following section 
discusses policy implications of the Sustainable Development Agenda for the UNDS. The 
final section recommends a new system-wide role for the UNDS based on a new system-
wide mandate in light of the current fragmented, overarching mandate.

---

Pio Wennubst / Timo Mahn 
10 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
3.1 
Policy implications for the UNDS 
“It has long been obvious that key socio-economic processes which operate beyond any 
one state's control should be managed by international bodies representing the interests 
of all states.” (Childers / Urquhart 1994, 17) 
While the label has sometimes been misused to get attention and support for niche issues, 
the ‘Sustainable Development Agenda’ clearly constitutes a paradigm shift in global 
thinking on development. Seeing that the current usage of resources compromises the abil-
ity of future generations to meet their needs (World Commission on Environment and De-
velopment 1987), it introduces an alternative model to reconcile the economic, social and 
environmental aspects of development (UN Conference on Environment and Development 
1992). The Sustainable Development Agenda constitutes a “game-changer” in global de-
velopment cooperation (Rochester 1993).  
Since 1987, when the World Commission on Environment and Development introduced 
the Sustainable Development Agenda, it quickly became established in debates at the UN 
and elsewhere. Within a few years, the Sustainable Development Agenda was featured at a 
major UN conference that was attended by record numbers of heads of state. More recent 
proposals and thinking, such as the “water-energy-food nexus” (Hoff 2011), the “safe and 
just space for humanity” (Raworth 2012) or the “approaching great transformation” of a 
post-carbon economy (Magnuson 2013), have enhanced the original concept, while the 
assertion of the ‘Anthropocene’ epoch of the earth system has served as a grave reminder 
to sceptics of the global impact of human action (Steffen / Crutzen / McNeill 2007). Final-
ly, the notion that humanity transgresses “planetary boundaries” (Rockstrom et al. 2009) 
has instilled a new sense of urgency in the debates.  
A number of general policy implications can be identified (see Table 1 for a summary). 
 
One of the most salient features of the new paradigm is that it is applicable to every 
country because of the increasingly global effect of phenomena such as population 
growth, inequality, trans-boundary security threats, loss of biodiversity, water short-
ages and volatile financial markets.  
 
The Sustainable Development Agenda calls for action on time horizons that are much 
longer than those commonly associated with development thinking. It often requires 
action over several human generations – largely surpassing the decade or two that po-
litical leaders generally hold office. 
 
If humanity wants to ensure future generations decent lives, collective action is        
urgently needed to address imbalances in accessing livelihood assets,9 both in terms 
of equity and sustainability. Making sustainable development tangible requires joint 
efforts by the public and private sectors, as well as by individuals. Everyone must 
                                                           
9  
A livelihood is a combination of the resources used and the activities undertaken by a household to provide 
sustenance for its members. ‘Resources’ include individual skills and abilities (human capital), land, savings 
and equipment (natural, financial and physical capital) and social support structures, such as formal support 
groups or informal networks that assist in the activities undertaken (social capital). A livelihood is sustaina-
ble when it can cope with and recover from shocks and maintain its capabilities and assets without depleting 
its natural resource base.

---

A resolution for a quiet revolution 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
11 
contribute toward achieving a development model that does not overstep planetary 
boundaries.  
 
Communications technology, the Internet and social media are causing a massive and 
rapid increase in global knowledge-sharing that creates stronger interconnectivity and 
interdependence; ‘silo’ and disconnected approaches and structures are no longer ap-
propriate.  
 
The Sustainable Development Agenda entails a fundamental transformation of global 
development cooperation to go ‘beyond aid’. Global trends in economic, social and en-
vironmental investments reveal great reductions in the ODA component as a fraction of 
the total financial flows to developing countries almost everywhere, meaning that there 
are fewer fields of intervention where only development practitioners are active.  
 
The Sustainable Development Agenda must set the stage for societal changes that 
happen through generalizing tested innovative approaches. Regulatory and normative 
frameworks must be drafted; usually this is the responsibility of the public sector. 
Human beings learn quickly and adapt their behaviour to contextual changes. In orga-
nized societies, de facto or de jure regulatory frameworks typically define the context. 
In terms of sustainable development, de facto regulations are usually limits set by 
natural laws, while de jure regulations define the degrees of intervention of regulators 
to impose, incentivise, permit, discourage or prohibit actions to guide personal behav-
iour, often in anticipation of a de facto rule.  
Making the Sustainable Development Agenda operational will largely be a matter of ad-
justing regulatory frameworks to facilitate equitable and sustainable access to livelihood 
assets. With regard to its implementation, a “normative gap” (Thakur / Weiss 2009) clear-
ly exists. Sustainability of access implies, first and foremost, that livelihood assets are and 
will be available, a precondition that might be increasingly difficult to ensure if current 
trends continue regarding the availability of the natural resource base.10 
All countries must put their economies on the path of Sustainable Development; many 
have been making efforts for decades. Efforts initiated in a single sector often constitute a 
nucleus that eventually will have to be embedded in a broader development strategy in 
order to strengthen inter-sectoral linkages and adapt to specific contexts (see Box 3 for 
examples). 
Because the Sustainable Development Agenda calls for action by public, private and soci-
etal actors, the question arises about the UNDS’s particular role and contribution. Unfor-
tunately, the Rio+20 outcome document provides little guidance. One of the few para-
graphs to address the issue invites the “programmes, funds and specialized agencies” to 
“…further enhance the mainstreaming of sustainable development in their respective 
mandates, programmes, strategies and decision-making processes, in support of the ef-
forts of all countries, in particular developing countries, in the achievement of sustainable 
development” (UNGA 2012, 19). 
                                                           
10  Attention must be paid to the link between vulnerability and sustainable development, especially in situa-
tions where de facto rules directly impact on livelihoods. This might happen in natural disasters, countries 
affected by long-term climate-change-related effects, and conflict situations. While we acknowledge this 
dimension, addressing it is beyond the scope of this paper (see Box 5).

---

Pio Wennubst / Timo Mahn 
12 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
Box 3: ‘Sustainable development’ in practice 
The process of implementing a coherent approach to guide nations and societies towards the new para-
digm of sustainable development must take place at different levels. At the national level, several attempts 
have already been made. Germany and Switzerland, for example, have recently begun transforming their 
energy policies (Energiewende) – with the mid-term goal of abolishing nuclear power sources that is 
linked to the long-term goal of procuring all energy (for electricity, heating and transportation) from re-
newable sources (Federal Ministry for the Environment, Natural Conservation and Nuclear Safety 2011; 
Schweizerische Eidgenossenschaft 2013). The Kingdom of Bhutan has aligned government policy and 
activities based on their contribution to a National Happiness Index (GNH), which has replaced the gross 
domestic product (GDP) commonly used elsewhere. The GNH, with its four pillars of sustainable devel-
opment, preservation of cultural value, conservation of the environment and good governance, uses so-
phisticated indices and draws on the latest findings from empirical research. While it was never intended 
to be used for international comparisons or ranking, Bhutan appears to be faring quite well on its alterna-
tive path (Helliwell / Layard / Sachs 2012). Bhutan’s experience is gaining global recognition, as evi-
denced by the GA’s first resolution on happiness11 in 2011 and its introduction of the ‘International Day 
of Happiness’ in 2012.12 Ethiopia, which has been branding itself as a front runner in sustainable devel-
opment, aims to be carbon-neutral by 2025 through its green-growth strategy (Government of Ethiopia 
2011). These examples demonstrate that, despite their stage of development, governments worldwide are 
setting out on the path towards sustainable development. 
Source: 
Authors 
The call for the UNDS to engage is loud and clear. A recent survey of programme coun-
tries revealed that the Sustainable Development Agenda is their highest priority for the 
next four years (UNSG 2012b, 9). In a move to align global priorities, the Secretary-
General has placed the issue at the top of his agenda (UNSG 2012d). The UN is the birth-
place of the concept (Jolly / Emmerij / Weiss 2009), with a legacy of engagement.  
A close reading of the implications of the Sustainable Development Agenda suggests that 
the UNDS is well positioned to play a key role in implementing the new paradigm.  
 
The UNDS is grounded in the principle of servicing all countries worldwide. Member 
States have repeatedly confirmed the ‘universal nature’ of the operational activities 
for development as one of the UNDS’s original principles – most recently, in the 
QCPR Resolution of 2012 (OP 4). Unlike most of the MDGs, the Sustainable Devel-
opment Goals (SDGs) are viewed as applying to all countries – including developed 
nations. The presence of SDGs in 136 programme activities in over 180 countries 
(UNDOCO 2012) suggests that universal engagement would be an extension of cur-
rent practice – not a radical re-orientation. Global engagement would have the added 
benefit of strengthening the perception that the UNDS is relevant to all countries, in-
cluding those that make significant financial contributions (compare the Nordic UN 
Project 1991, 121).  
 
While not unique to the UNDS, multilateral collaboration perpetuates joint endeav-
ours over extended periods. One key lesson of the MDG process was that it focussed 
energies around a set of common targets for more than a decade. Most SDG proposals 
envision a longer timeline – between 15 and 30 years (see UN System Task Team on 
the Post–2015 UN Development Agenda 2012, 37).  
                                                           
11  UN Doc. GA/Res/65/309 of 19 Jul. 2011.  
12  UN Doc. GA/Res/66/281 of 12 Jul. 2012.

---

A resolution for a quiet revolution 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
13 
 
The UNDS has the power to convene various stakeholders to address common chal-
lenges. Despite their shortcomings, the UNDS and the UN have formed partnerships 
with a wide variety of external stakeholders. UNICEF’s engagement with the furni-
ture concern IKEA13 or the Secretary-General’s partnership initiatives such as “Every 
Women, Every Child”14 or “Sustainable Energy for All”15 are examples of engage-
ment with public, private and societal actors. 
 
The UN’s greatest asset and ‘working capital’ is its worldwide input legitimacy that 
assures acceptance of its outputs and services. This legitimacy stems from the three 
fundamental principles of the United Nations – universal membership, equality of all 
members and neutrality – as stated in Article 100 of the UN Charter. The GA, and by 
extension, the funds and programmes of its subsidiary bodies, are based on the princi-
ple of “one state, one vote” – which provides the UNDS with a unique level of credi-
bility from Member States.  
Member States’ debates about the particular role and contribution of the UNDS are closely 
related to what is seen as its comparative advantage (Weinlich 2011, 23 ff.). While there is 
a certain amount of interplay between the role/contribution of the UNDS and its compara-
tive advantage, theoretically these should be aligned. Since other multilateral and bilateral 
agencies pursue similar objectives, it must be clear that the UNDS does not exist within a 
vacuum. Views about its comparative advantages diverge, however. For example, in light 
of its massive presence in the field, some donor countries advocate that the UNDS should 
focus on fragile states and function as a ‘lender of last resort’. 
Most, however, agree about the UNDS’s unique value in linking a normative and opera-
tional mandate. A comprehensive study of the role of the UN in the economic and social 
fields, says it has “not only a comparative, but an absolute advantage” in its normative 
role (Nordic UN Project 1991, 171).  
More recently, the SG’s report in preparation for the QCPR stated that operational activi-
ties are needed to leverage “development with normative, standard-setting and fact-
finding work” (UNSG 2012c). Member States broadly confirmed this view in the QCPR 
Resolution of 2012 (OP 58).  
Taking these factors into account, one reaches the conclusion that the UNDS’s special role 
regarding implementation of the Sustainable Development Agenda is to address the ‘norma-
tive gap’ in practical support for the transformation towards the new paradigm, and especial-
ly to create a normative foundation to guide operations and make it operational. 
Table 1 summarises these findings.16  
 
                                                           
13  See UNICEF webpage, www.unicef.org/corporate_partners/index_25092.html, accessed 17 May 2013. 
14  See “Every Women, Every Child” webpage, www.everywomaneverychild.org, accessed 17 May 2013. 
15  See “Sustainable Energy for All” webpage, www.sustainableenergyforall.org, accessed 17 May 2013. 
16 
Two key implications of the new paradigm for transforming to a more cohesive system that goes ‘beyond 
aid’ are addressed in Chapters 4 and 5.

---

Pio Wennubst / Timo Mahn 
14 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
Table 1: The role of the UNDS in the new paradigm 
Dimension 
Sustainable Development 
UNDS role 
Scope 
global 
to service all countries 
time horizon 
long-term 
to perpetuate global action 
Responsibility 
public, private, society 
to form and regulate partnerships 
Approach 
holistic and encompassing  
to transform to a cohesive system 
funding source 
significant contributions  
to go ‘beyond aid’ 
objective  
balanced access to livelihood 
assets 
to adapt and adopt 
norms+regulations 
Source: 
Authors, modeled on Melamed / Scott / Mitchell 2012 
3.2 
The quest for a system-wide guiding mandate 
“The UN development enterprise […] rests on shaky political foundations be-
cause neither its raison d’être nor its legitimacy have been durably agreed upon.”  
(Fomerand 2003, 4)  
In terms of system-wide guidance about which particular operational activities it should 
pursue, the UNDS relies on some elements and stand-alone approximations of an over-
arching mandate. This means that attempts to more clearly define the UNDS focus are 
“still pending” (Weinlich 2011). This fact has contributed to the system’s “blurred profile” 
(Vatterodt 2008, 68). What is the source of systemic guidance about what the UNDS 
should pursue?  
The UN Charter must be the starting point for any inquiry into a system-wide mandate in 
support of the UNDS. Article 1 stresses that the UN must achieve international coopera-
tion and be a force for harmonizing efforts to solve global problems of an economic, so-
cial, cultural or humanitarian character, while also promoting and encouraging respect for 
human rights and fundamental freedoms without distinction as to race, sex, language or 
religion. Article 55 includes a comment on the need for full employment in a definition of 
ECOSOC functions, and Article 62 makes particular reference to educational, health and 
related matters. It is unrealistic to expect more specific guidance for the UNDS in a docu-
ment written in 1945. Throughout its history, the UNDS has been charged with mandates 
for more and more operational activities for development (UNSG 2009, 16) but most of 
the concerned institutions were established after 1945.  
The GA declarations about the UN Decades of Development, from 1960 to 2000, were a 
more substantive attempt to provide system-wide guidance for the UNDS. Although spe-
cifically addressed to “Member States and their peoples”,17 they had an indirect impact on 
the UNDS, especially early on. Established at John F. Kennedy’s initiative, the first two 
decades were more successful than is commonly known (Jolly / Emmerij / Weiss 2009, 
87). However, after the “lost decade” of the 1980s and the declaration of the fourth decade 
                                                           
17  Compare UN Doc. GA/1710 (XVI) and A/1715 (XVI) of 19 Dec. 1961.

---

A resolution for a quiet revolution 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
15 
(the 1990s) were overtaken by the fundamental changes brought about by the end of the 
Cold War, they rapidly waned in importance and eventually were replaced by the 
MDGs.18  
In 1993, the famous GA Res. 48/162 about the “restructuring and revitalization of the UN 
in the economic, social and related fields”, that hinted at a system-wide orientation for the 
UNDS, contained a long list of references to “established goals, targets and programmes 
for action”, including the Development Decade and the Rio Conference on Sustainable 
Development. It specifically requested ECOSOC to provide the UN with cross-sectoral 
coordination and overall guidance, including objectives, priorities and strategies for im-
plementing policies for operational activities. Once again, however, the point of reference 
was the how of the UNDS rather than the what. Similarly, the SG’s biennial UN Strategic 
Framework that Member States review in the Committee for Programme and Coordination 
(CPC) provides guidance for Secretariat activities but is not specifically related to opera-
tional activities for development. 
Following the Millennium Declaration in the year 2000, the MDGs have served as the 
main guidelines for the UNDS. Although they did not result from intergovernmental nego-
tiation, they are broadly accepted as providing a viable and useful framework. However, 
the MDGs are not specific to UN activities: providing specific guidance would require a 
system-wide interpretation of the UNDS’s particular role and mandate, and how it com-
plements other actors. Some reflection is needed about what the UNDS can best offer for 
these or other future goals. 
Since the TCPR/QCPR resolutions were first established in 1977, they have developed 
into a source of substantive guidance relating to the what of UNDS operational activities. 
Originally rather limited, especially following the MDGs, the practice has been expand-
ed.19 Close reading of the 2012 QCPR Resolution reveals that it also contains substantive 
‘mandate-like’ fragments. For example, the Resolution: 
 
requests an increase in investments regarding gender equality (OP 81); 
 
requests a demand-driven response to help countries that are affected by disasters or 
conflicts to transition from relief to development status (OP 94); and most explicitly  
 
calls upon UNDS organizations to assign the highest priority to poverty eradication 
(OP 71).  
The long list of conferences and summits (OP 8) that are viewed as having shaped a broad 
vision of development and identifying challenges to improving human life in different 
parts of the world (OP 9) reveals other aspects of the UNDS’s orientation towards a sys-
tem-wide mandate. Finally, although full consensus was not reached during negotiations 
                                                           
18  Compare UN Doc. GA/RES/55/190 of 29 Jan. 2001. 
19  Compare TCPR Resolution of 2002 (UN Doc. GA/RES/56/201 of 6 Mar. 2002), which “stresses the need 
for all organizations of the United Nations development system, in accordance with their respective man-
dates, to focus their efforts at the field level in accordance with the priorities identified by recipient countries 
and the goals, targets and commitments set in the Millennium Declaration and by the major United Nations 
conferences” (OP 10).

---

Pio Wennubst / Timo Mahn 
16 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
on the QCPR in 2012, there was dialogue that might pave the way for future system-wide 
mandates to the UNDS in crucial but contentious areas like human rights. A new preamble 
paragraph spelling out specific human rights (para. 14) hints at this dialogue.  
This raises questions about the original intent and purpose of the TCPR/QCPR resolutions 
and their effectiveness and legitimacy in addressing substantive issues (the what). Who 
mandated QCPR negotiators to address specific parts of the UNDS’s system-wide man-
date? Why was poverty eradication included in the 2012 Resolution but not in the TCPR 
Resolution of 2004? Could the next QCPR resolution request, for example, that the UNDS 
focus on supporting countries by building capacities and providing policy expertise, as 
well as advising on legislation and norms – and leave the operational support needed to 
eradicate hunger to other actors? 
Substantive guidance to the UNDS in TCPR/QCPR resolutions has evolved over time. 
Member States are becoming more interested in negotiating a system-wide mandate, as 
illustrated by the addition of a new chapter on poverty eradication in the QCPR Resolution 
of 2012. Because these are only fragments of negotiated mandates, however, the link be-
tween them and the operational guidance system remains incomplete. 
Current trends reveal strong momentum for effecting change within the UNDS, with sev-
eral reform processes taking place simultaneously, all of which have far reaching implica-
tions for the whole system:  
 
The High-level Political Forum (HLPF) will become the place to debate sustainable 
development at the political level, as decided during the Rio+20 Conference.20  
 
A post–2015 development framework is being discussed. 
 
An intergovernmental process that aims to define SDGs is ongoing.  
 
ECOSOC is revising its functions and structures as part of a long-term reform process.  
 
Deliberations have begun about system-wide support to enhance the thematic and 
multi-partner initiatives launched by the Secretary-General. 
 
Preliminary discussions in a new working group have started about the future funding 
of UN development efforts. 
Member States appear to have the opportunity to use these reform processes to give a new 
and system-wide mandate to the UNDS. Opportunities regarding the HLPF seem particu-
larly promising, as it could fill the gap left by the expiring MDGs. The HLPF would offer 
crucial orientation to the UNDS with regard to the what by regularly securing guidance 
from the highest political level (possibly from heads of state) regarding the UN’s specific 
contribution to implementing the Sustainable Development Agenda. Such a mechanism 
seems feasible, straightforward and in the spirit of the intense debate and negotiations 
around Rio+20 that ended by signalling that the HLPF should be more than simply an 
“enhanced Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD)”. For the UNDS, it would 
strengthen the link between the QCPR Resolutions (the only resolutions that address how 
the UNDS should work) and what to focus on – that is, the mandate and the operations.  
                                                           
20  See UNUNGA 2013 for a comprehensive assessment of lessons about the shortcomings of the Commission 
on Sustainable Development.

---

A resolution for a quiet revolution 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
17 
Such a measure would probably entail the HLPF incorporating a regular review of the 
system-wide mandate for sustainable development into its core functions. Benefitting from 
the recent alignment of UNDS strategic planning to the QCPR cycle, the mandate review 
would ideally follow the same four-year cycle, with the HLPF providing guidance on the 
system-wide mandate for each new QCPR cycle,21 thereby setting the necessary bound-
aries for UNDS functioning. 
4 
A ‘quiet revolution’ towards a cohesive UNDS 
“It is tempting, if the only tool you have is a hammer, to treat everything as if it were 
a nail.” (Maslow 1966) 
As a holistic, transformational and global concept, the Sustainable Development Agenda 
calls for more cohesion within the UNDS. The institutional set-up and functionalist basis 
of the UNDS do not seem appropriate for implementing a system-wide mandate. The 
UNDS requires significant institutional restructuring in order to maintain its prominent 
role in the international development architecture. Recent reforms in this direction, includ-
ing the System-wide Coherence process (2006–2010), have demonstrated the importance 
that Member States attach to a more cohesive UNDS, and the QCPR Resolution of 2012 
shows that agreement is growing in this respect.  
4.1 
The UNDS and system-wide cohesion 
The Sustainable Development Agenda has important implications for how the UNDS 
functions: Member States will have to forge a more cohesive arrangement. A report by the 
Secretary General foresees the need for a “much tighter fit between the normative and 
operational arms” of the UNDS (UNSG 2012b, 9). The current lack of coherence limits 
the UNDS’s ability to exploit the crucial synergies that define the Sustainable Develop-
ment Agenda; ‘business as usual’ no longer seems to be an option.  
The UNDS consists of 37 entities that engage in operational activities for development 
(UNSG 2012a, 42)22 – aimed at both long-term development and short-term humanitarian 
relief measures (compare UNSG 2012a). From a legal perspective, the funds and pro-
grammes are GA subsidiary organs that are mostly active in field-level operational activi-
ties, whereas the specialized agencies are more autonomous because of their separate found-
ing treaties and, in some cases, distinct membership and governing bodies. They are incor-
porated into the UN system through ECOSOC on the basis of relationship agreements. 
UNDS entities therefore have varying degrees of independence and types of relationships 
with the intergovernmental level – represented by ECOSOC and its governing bodies. The 
                                                           
21  The HLPF message about the system-wide mandate would have to take one of two forms – as either a politi-
cal declaration or a second negotiated resolution. The latter could become time-consuming and, apart from 
the QCPR, would require a second round of complex negotiations (compare Box 4). Should political deci-
sion-makers broadly agree, however, general ‘mandate-like’ messages would probably suffice, and a decla-
ration or a chairperson’s summary could be used to provide system-wide guidance to the UNDS and the ne-
gotiations for a new QCPR resolution. 
22  See Annex 2 for a complete list of the entities.

---

Pio Wennubst / Timo Mahn 
18 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
internal ‘logic’ of the different entities is also diverse, ranging from traditional development 
‘sectors’, to particular ‘target groups’, cross-cutting issues and particular countries or re-
gions. The UNDS’s low level of institutional cohesion is why use of the term ‘system’ has 
been challenged (UNSG 2009; Righter 1995, 48 ff.; Jenks et al. 2005). 
The ‘compartmentalised’ structure of the UNDS results from the concept of ‘functional-
ism’,23 which was influential in the debates before the United Nations was established 
(Jenks et al. 2005). Functionalism viewed international peace and stability as an intended 
spillover or side effect of ever-increasing, mainly technical and issue-driven, ‘functional’ 
cooperation and increased non-political relations among states. Functionalism tends to 
favour the proliferation of institutions, and since cooperation sectors are limited, it also 
favours the increased differentiation and compartmentalisation of (development) coopera-
tion. Avoiding overarching ‘political’ considerations of management and direction while 
preserving the organizational autonomy of individual UNDS entities was integral to the 
concept. The relationship between the entities that make up the UNDS has historically 
been one of coexistence rather than direction, whereby entities are only loosely coupled in 
a polycentric fashion (Righter 1995). This, and the disaggregation resulting from UNDS 
growth “without a pre-established blue-print” (Fomerand 2003, 2), are the two main lega-
cies that beleaguer the UNDS today. 
The nature of the development paradigm – currently the MDGs – may have further con-
tributed to UNDS incoherence. Since the MDGs were established in the year 2000, they 
have greatly impacted the field of development cooperation: their instrumentality in terms 
of fund-raising and mobilising joint efforts is universally acknowledged. Indeed, from a 
narrow perspective, this was their main purpose (Fukuda–Parr 2012,10). But their impact 
on the UNDS internal institutional arrangement may have been less salutary: by instigat-
ing a pick-and-choose approach among the eight goals, the MDGs seem to have encour-
aged donors to earmark. The MDGs followed a ‘functionalist’ logic of compartmentalis-
ing developmental challenges in different functional sectors and associated target groups, 
which was appropriate with the UNDS’s conventional institutional arrangement. However, 
the potential adoption of a new framework based on the post–2015 Sustainable Develop-
ment Agenda portends significant institutional reform.  
Although the concept of functionalism was influential when the UNDS was being estab-
lished, it has also been challenged. There have been many successes from international 
development cooperation, yet notwithstanding the achievements, institutional pathologies 
resulting from an arrangement that did not favour system-wide cohesion were noted early 
on, encouraging efforts to create system-wide cohesion. Such reform attempts began 
shortly after the UNDS was established. 
One of the first endeavours at systematically analysing and identifying institutional chal-
lenges within the UNDS was the “Capacity Study” of 1969. During the 1970s, the 
UNDS’s operational activities became more sophisticated and diverse, partly influenced 
by world conferences – including the Stockholm Conference on the Human Environment 
(1972) – that took place during that period. After the 1980s’ “lost decade” for develop-
ment, during the 1990s, system-wide cohesion slowly rose on the agenda of the interna-
                                                           
23  The seminal publication, A Working Peace System, by David Mitrany (Mitrany 1966) is often credited with 
developing the concept.

---

A resolution for a quiet revolution 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
19 
tional community. Partly because central-level reforms were deemed politically unfeasi-
ble, attention shifted to the operational and country level, where it was hoped that greater 
cohesion could be achieved through common premises and programming frameworks, and 
other measures.24 However, only after the World Summit review of the MDGs in 2005 
was there another major attempt at reform, which took the form of the High-level Panel on 
System-wide Coherence and its report, “Delivering as One” in 2006.25 With only two of 
the main headline initiatives implemented – the establishment of UN Women and the 2012 
QCPR’s acknowledgment of “Delivering as One” as an alternative business model – the 
system-wide coherence process looks rather modest.  
One major success of the High-level Panel on System-wide Coherence that is frequently 
overlooked, however, is that it created the common understanding that a more cohesive 
UNDS was needed. Indeed, interest in system-wide cohesion influences debates on the 
UN’s future direction and is clearly reflected in the 2012 QCPR Resolution, albeit not 
(yet) in fully practical terms. As Margret Joan Anstee wrote recently: “The one great les-
son of the 66 years since the United Nations [became involved in operational activities for 
development] is that development efforts will not succeed unless they are integrated”  
(Anstee 2012). The Sustainable Development Agenda reinforces this thinking.  
Increasingly, indications of a reform towards a cohesive UNDS are seen in its structure. 
The UNDS is transitioning towards a higher level of system-wide cohesion. Although 
once it was difficult to speak of a UN development ‘system’ because of its low level of 
cohesiveness (Hill 2010; Browne 2011; Browne 2012), this is changing: throughout the 
UNDS, system-wide elements are already in place or are evolving. The current state of 
affairs could be described as a ‘mixed system’ with elements of system-wide orientation 
alongside more traditional and agency-specific organizational models. 
4.2 
A system-wide message from Member States 
The transition that has slowly been taking place in the UNDS could be described as a 
move from the traditional ‘functionalist’ system of organization towards a more integrat-
ed, ‘post-functionalist’ approach. The 2012 QCPR Resolution contains fragments of struc-
tures, systems and processes that are system-wide, but which will have to be more broadly 
systematised in order to accommodate the Sustainable Development Agenda.  
Member States have used QCPR resolutions to advocate system-wide cohesion for some 
time. Analysis of previous TCPR/QCPR resolutions reveals that Member States are in-
creasingly addressing themselves to the UNDS as a whole. Nearly 70 per cent of the man-
dates (operative paragraphs) of past resolutions address either the inter-agency machinery 
or the whole UNDS, while the share of mandates that relate to individual components or 
parts of the system has dropped significantly. Member States are also becoming more re-
luctant to address the UN Secretariat, whose share of mandates plummeted from a high of 
36 per cent in 1980 to just 11 per cent in 2012 (compare Table 2 and Figure 1 for the de-
tails, and Annex 2 for methodological background).  
                                                           
24  Compare Kofi Annan’s reform initiatives, “Renewing the United Nations” (UN Doc. A/51/950 of 15 Jul. 
1997 and “An Agenda for Further Change” (UN Doc. A/57/387 of 9 Sept. 2002).  
25  UN Doc. 61/583 of 20 Nov. 2006.

---

20 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Table
Addr
UNDS
Inter-
Secre
Interg
Other
Sourc
There
one u
activit
Other
develo
encom
fact th
that v
fined 
Figur
 
Sourc
 
            
26  In
pr
%
%
%
%
%
%
1980
UNDS
e 2: 
The ev
essee (%) 
S System 
-agency 
etariat 
governmenta
r  
ce: 
Authors
e are variou
sed by the 
ties for dev
 definitions
opment (co
mpassing th
hat some a
views vary 
by its over
re 1: 
Addre
ce: 
Authors
                      
n 2012, these w
ractice” to be f
Germa
1983
1986
Inter‐a
volution of ad
1980  
27 
0 
36 
al 
5 
32 
 
us standard
UN Secret
velopment,
s include th
ompare Hill
he term sho
gencies hav
within the 
all purpose
essees of TCP
; see Annex 1
                      
were the FAO,
followed by oth
an Developme
6
1989
1
agency
ddressees of T
1983  1986
38 
29 
4 
8 
31 
26 
4 
11 
22 
27 
d usages an
ariat in fin
, which enc
he 32 mem
l 2010). On
ould be, an
ve agreed t
system. Th
e, as determ
PR/QCPR res
 for the comp
    
, UNESCO, U
her entities (JIU
ent Institute / D
1992
1995
Secretariat
TCPR/QCPR
1989 
1992
33 
19
26 
22
18 
22
9 
12
14 
26
nd definitio
ancial repo
compasses 
mbers of the
ne of the m
nd if it sho
to abide by
he conclusi
mined in a sy
solutions by d
position of cate
UNIDO and W
U 2012, 23 and
Deutsches Ins
1998
2
Intergov
R resolutions 
2 
1995 
19
38 
3
11 
2
23 
1
8 
1
21 
2
ns of the t
orts about th
37 funds, 
e UNDG or
main points 
ould include
y the QCPR
ion here is 
ystem-wide
different acto
egories.  
WHO. The JIU 
d 32). 
Pio We
titut für Entw
2001
2004
vernmental
over time 
998 
2001  2
32 
39 
23 
17 
11 
8 
11 
9 
23 
26 
erm ‘UND
he UN syst
programm
r 53 organi
of content
e specialize
R26 and oth
that ‘UND
e mandate. 
ors 
considers that 
ennubst / Tim
wicklungspoliti
2007
20
Other
2004  2007  
42 
47 
14 
18 
13 
17 
9 
3 
21 
16 
S’, includi
tem’s opera
mes and age
izations act
tion is abou
ed agencie
hers not, su
DS’ should 
t this constitute
mo Mahn 
ik (DIE) 
012
2012 
50 
19 
11 
4 
15 
ng the 
ational 
encies. 
tive in 
ut how 
s. The 
uggests 
be de-
es “good

---

A resolution for a quiet revolution 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
21 
Irrespective of its final shape, transitioning to a more cohesive UNDS implies a set of 
comprehensive adjustments that will take time and commitment from Member States. 
With new inter-agency fora and organizations like UN Women, Member States have 
already introduced some system-wide inter-agency interlocutors. But because all sys-
tem structures are connected, changing any single element necessitates further chang-
es. For example, establishing an independent evaluation mechanism in the UNDS 
seems consistent with the trend towards greater cohesion, but its implementation 
would require new system-wide processes to review the evaluation outcomes and act 
on them.  
In conclusion, Member States’ growing emphasis on system-wide approaches to 
UNDS operations require parallel efforts to strengthen system-wide oversight and 
management mechanisms, as well as other elements necessary for a functioning, trans-
parent and accountable UNDS. The implications will be explored below.  
4.3 
Elements of the quiet revolution 
There are various ways to approach UNDS reform processes. Indeed, selecting the ap-
propriate approach to reforms has long been the subject of academic debates, with ‘big 
bang’ and ‘incremental’ constituting the two poles of a continuum of options (Mahn 
2012, 9). Revisions of the UN Charter have proven so difficult that they are often con-
sidered impossible. As with most public institutions, institutional change in the UNDS 
has mostly been incremental and iterative instead of prescriptive (Fomerand 2003, 30). 
Therefore, a quiet revolution of a series of major, yet achievable, steps to create a more 
cohesive UNDS seems more realistic than a one-off transformation. The quiet ap-
proach targets the UNDS’s inner functioning and set-up, and strengthens incentives, 
transparency and accountability. It reduces the need for structural changes while at-
tempting to create a coherent, effective and efficient operational development system.  
The 2012 QCPR Resolution, which provides many indications for the direction of fu-
ture reform efforts, seems to be an appropriate starting point for the quiet revolution. 
The QCPR process sought to reduce and eliminate incongruities in the UNDS and 
make it more efficient by adapting state-of-the art business practices. The following 
section outlines key steps for preparing the UNDS to leap into the future. A quiet revo-
lution of reforms consolidates operating functions and fine-tunes decision-making pro-
cedures and lines of accountability in the aim of creating a fully transparent systemic 
response to the needs of individual countries – in accordance with the UN’s system-
wide mandate. The overview of the UNDS structure in Figure 2 indicates the main 
areas of reform. Particular attention is paid to the UNDS governance and management 
dimensions, where pressure for substantial change has been building for several years; 
in this respect, there was no progress made in the 2012 QCPR Resolution.

---

22 
Figur
 
Sourc
re 2: 
A quie
ce: 
Authors
Germa
et revolution 
 
an Developme
in the UNDS
ent Institute / D
S 
Deutsches Ins
Pio We
titut für Entw
ennubst / Tim
wicklungspoliti
mo Mahn 
ik (DIE)

---

A resolution for a quiet revolution 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
23 
4.3.1 Oversight 
“The machine as a whole has become unmanageable in the strictest sense of the 
word.” (Sir Robert Jackson, UNDP 1969) 
Reforms leading to a more systemic approach to intergovernmental oversight and govern-
ance in the UNDS lag behind operational reforms and increasingly conflict with the rest of 
the system. While other functional areas of the UNDS are adopting system-wide ap-
proaches, lack of progress in aligning intergovernmental mechanisms is increasing friction 
and concern. This issue was prominent during the 2012 QCPR negotiations but not re-
solved. However, with the matter high on the agenda for some time now (Fomerand 2003, 
30), Member States are becoming more receptive to making substantial changes.  
Historically, the UNDS’s intergovernmental oversight function rested with ECOSOC27 
and the executive boards of the different entities. GA Resolution 48/162 mandated 
ECOSOC to review and evaluate the work of the executive boards. However, for reasons 
including capacity constraints and inconsistent messages from Member States, the link 
between ECOSOC and the executive boards has always been weak. As a result, it has been 
reported that ECOSOC “does not have an effective overview and role in mandates ema-
nating from executive boards”.28  
Unsurprisingly, the 2012 QCPR Resolution acknowledges ECOSOC’s major role in the 
overall coordination of funds, programmes and specialized agencies (OP 7). Member 
States look forward to ECOSOC’s review and assessment of the QCPR implementation 
(OP 185). In order to close the feedback loop in assessing the effectiveness, efficiency, 
and relevance of activities, Member States request the SG to conduct a biennial survey of 
governments about the benefits and challenges of interacting with the UNDS (OP 188).  
The 2012 QCPR Resolution indicates that Member States want ECOSOC to play a more 
substantive role. Concerning the “Delivering as One” initiative that aims to strengthen the 
collaboration of UNDS entities at the country level, for example, the UNDS is asked to 
report to ECOSOC on matters related to the new Standard Operating Procedures (OP 
140). The SG’s report should also include options for ECOSOC to review and approve 
common country programme documents (OP 143). Member States also request the SG to 
use the system-wide CEB inter-agency mechanism, and to present plans for establishing 
common support services by 2016 in two of its three main committees, the High-level 
Committee on Management (HLCM) and the United Nations Development Group 
(UNDG). These are to be developed and reviewed by ECOSOC (OP 155). Without a sys-
tem-wide mechanism or institution, however, it is expected that these plans will have to be 
individually approved by the governing boards of each of the UNDS entities. The 2012 
QCPR Resolution similarly requests the UNDS to develop a strategy and report to 
ECOSOC on progress establishing common premises in countries (OP 161). It also re-
quests the SG to articulate a harmonized, results-based approach to operational activities 
and report this to ECOSOC (OP 169). These various mandates illustrate the Member 
States’ intention to strengthen system-wide oversight of development operations. 
                                                           
27  This is mainly carried out by ECOSOC’s ‘operational segment’.  
28  UN Doc. A/60/733 of 30 Mar. 2006.

---

Pio Wennubst / Timo Mahn 
24 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
The analysis above shows that the negotiators had authority to instruct the governing bod-
ies of the funds, programmes and specialized agencies, but their authority does not seem 
to have extended to instructing the ECOSOC to act on system-wide issues. While this sit-
uation may be partially due to the UN Charter that prevents ECOSOC from deciding on 
behalf of the GA, clearly other factors were also at work. In that sense, the 2012 QCPR 
Resolution illustrates the current contradictions and functional imbalance in the UNDS, 
which become more apparent as system-wide approaches are broadening. For example, it 
seems inconsistent to execute intergovernmental oversight and governance based on an 
entity-specific approach while taking a system-wide approach to system management. 
This creates friction. In other words, Member States are sending more and more intergov-
ernmental and system-wide requests that are addressed through a system-wide inter-
agency management mechanism (the CEB and its committees), yet the mechanisms for 
system-wide governance are not on par. A more consistent approach would be to also shift 
functions like the authority to establish common support services for the entire UNDS to 
the systemic level. If provisions in the UN Charter cannot be changed, it would make 
sense for ECOSOC to be mandated to make system-wide recommendations that, through 
its operational segment, would then be endorsed by the GA. Since ECOSOC is the natural 
forum for system-wide guidance, it should be significantly reinforced. From a systemic 
perspective, it would be even more desirable for Member States to consider the option of 
ECOSOC acting as a system-wide executive board for the UNDS.  
In terms of programmatic coherence, the United Nations Development Assistance Frame-
work (UNDAF) is key to system-wide oversight at the country level and ECOSOC should 
ensure quality management as befits its oversight function. Finally, ECOSOC will be 
called upon to play a more prominent role in the system-wide monitoring and evaluation 
of UN development activities. Should a decision be taken to set up a system-wide financ-
ing mechanism, whether or not ECOSOC will represent Member States in their oversight 
functions will also have to be decided.  
ECOSOC seems ready to assume a more systemic role and function; it only lacks the 
mandate. A number of recent proposals have been made to create a new governance insti-
tution as a proxy for a system-wide oversight entity, but adding another layer to an already 
complex system would not be helpful. ECOSOC seems well positioned to fulfil this man-
date. The need for a powerful body to provide policy guidance and instil a sense of cohe-
sion in the UNDS has long been recognised (compare the Nordic UN Project 1991). So 
strengthening ECOSOC’s system-wide oversight mandate to implement QCPR resolutions 
would help to ensure more coherence in the UNDS and avoid the need to address the GA 
for minor technical matters. A significantly revamped ECOSOC would not make execu-
tive boards obsolete: these boards provide agency-specific intergovernmental oversight, 
which, along with system-wide governance, continues to be necessary. However, Member 
States have requested that board oversight correspond with the system-wide guidance by 
ECOSOC and the GA.  
Inaction on outstanding governance reforms carries the cost of rising policy incoherencies 
and adds complexity and accountability gaps to the challenges that come from mis-
matched mechanisms for inter-agency management and intergovernmental governance. 
Ultimately, negative externalities for UNDS functioning as a whole will result in reduced 
funding for each entity. There is also a clear incentive for all Member States, especially 
those with limited capacity to participate in intergovernmental affairs, to work towards a

---

A resolution for a quiet revolution 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
25 
consolidated governance and oversight function for system-wide matters. If the latter con-
tinue to be decided within the various executive boards, Member States’ ability to influ-
ence decisions will depend on their capacity to follow, prepare, attend and service multiple 
fora – which is difficult for many of them.  
In conclusion, given the growing imbalances regarding oversight and governance func-
tions and mechanisms in the UNDS, there seems to be a strong need for Member States to 
bring about change. Instead of adding new layers to the complexity and diffusion of inter-
governmental centers of governance, the best procedure seems to be to strengthen 
ECOSOC’s system-wide governance function.  
4.3.2 Management 
The UN Development Group (UNDG) is the main system-wide, inter-agency interlocutor 
to receive instructions from the intergovernmental governance mechanisms, especially 
those addressed to the UNDS as a whole. It is under the UN system’s main system-wide 
policy-coordinating body that was established by ECOSOC in 1946, the Chief Executives 
Board for Coordination (CEB),29 which has three committees: The High-level Committee 
on Management (HLCM) coordinates administrative, the UN Development Group 
(UNDG) managerial, and the High-level Committee on Programmes (HLCP) program-
matic affairs. The UNDG is most important of the three committees in terms of the 
UNDS. Established by the Secretary-General in 1997 and integrated into the CEB in 2008, 
the UNDG is mandated to coordinate, harmonize and align the UN development activities 
of its 32 members by providing support to countries for internationally agreed develop-
ment goals. It reports to the SG – and to ECOSOC through the CEB – about the imple-
mentation of its work plan and management of the RC system. The UN Development Op-
eration Coordination Office (DOCO) is the UNDG’s technical support unit; it provides a 
system-wide link between UN Headquarters and countries and helps the UNDG prepare 
agreements, policies and guidelines for country offices. 
Analysis of the mandates in the 2012 QCPR Resolution reveals that the UNDG/CEB as the 
main inter-agency coordination mechanism is scarcely addressed. For once, Member States 
rather timidly encourage the SG, through the CEB and the UNDG, to fulfil the task for 
which these bodies were created (OP 16), request greater transparency in their work (OP 17) 
and outline a set of specific requirements to that end (OP 17a-d). This falls short of a direct 
mandate to the UNDG/CEB, however. The HLCM and UNDG are also specifically men-
tioned in the context of harmonizing business practices (OP 155); and as chairman of the 
CEB, the SG is requested to include appropriate information about its work in the annual 
overview report to ECOSOC that is reviewed by the CPC (OP 17b). ECOSOC’s president is 
also requested to convene periodic briefings for Member States and the Secretariat “back-to-
back” with CEB sessions to help make the dialogue more effective (OP 17d). 
Even the passages that address specific tasks or characteristics of the UNDG, such as 
management of the RC system and the UNDG’s reports to ECOSOC via the CEB, do not 
mention it by name, however. From a system-wide perspective, this is a major deficiency, 
                                                           
29  UN Doc. Resolution 13 (III) created the Administrative Committee on Coordination (ACC) in 1946. Its 
current name was adopted in 2001.

---

Pio Wennubst / Timo Mahn 
26 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
resulting from diverging opinions and a lack of clarity about the extent of the “UNDS”. 
Apparently the Member States were unsure of the proper addressee for their messages so 
they decided to “read them aloud” to everybody.  
There are probably two main reasons why the UNDG was not more enthusiastically es-
poused: Since it is not a legal entity, it may not be perceived as the appropriate interlocu-
tor for system-wide management. It might also be sidelined due to its perceived lack of 
capacity and authority vis-à-vis the executive boards of the funds, programmes and spe-
cialized agencies.  
Most of the requests in the 2012 QCPR Resolution that are directed to the UNDS concern 
mandatory decisions which typically would have to be dealt with at the CEB level. This 
includes, for example, the system-wide interoperability of enterprise resource-planning 
systems (OP 160) that could enable the use of harmonized information and communica-
tions technology (ICT) for the system-wide exchange of information. Although the 
HLCM, as part of the CEB, is piloting the harmonization of business practices, it cannot 
generalise them as this falls outside the mandate of the Committee. The same can be said 
for the UNDG. The evolution of the former Executive Committee from a compact coordi-
nation mechanism for a few UNDS entities into the broad membership body that the 
UNDG has become was welcome. But since the QCPR is not mandatory for all members 
and the UNDG operates by consensus, the change has created new system-wide challeng-
es in terms of inter-agency decision-making. This is clear in the 2012 QCPR Resolution 
where Member States request the UNDS to promote the development of clear and robust 
result frameworks, and call on funds and programmes and encourage specialized agencies 
to consult them in this endeavour (OP 170). From a system-wide perspective, there seems 
to be a need for an inter-agency mechanism that can enforce decisions when disagreement 
persists among the different UNDS entities.  
What is called for is a strong link between ECOSOC, the intergovernmental entity that 
provides system-wide oversight and governance, and the CEB/UNDG, the system-wide 
mechanism for inter-agency management. While UNDS entities are and should remain 
accountable to their specific governing bodies regarding their respective mandates, future 
accountability for system-wide issues should rest with the CEB as manager and ECOSOC 
as the governing body. The necessary link between the CEB/UNDG and ECOSOC is al-
ready established through the QCPR provisions that are mandatory for UNDG members.  
The current UNDG is not a suitable interlocutor for a strengthened ECOSOC. The capacity 
and functionality of the oversight and management functions and their respective mecha-
nisms in the UNDS must be equally developed. UN Member States will be called upon to 
address the current mismatch so that UNDS governance and management levels correspond.  
4.3.3 Delegation of authority 
In many respects, reform of the UNDS resembles any national government’s effort to shift 
its functions, services and responsibilities to the sub-national level. Like decentralisation 
processes at the country level that aim to “bring services closer to the people”, the UNDS 
and other development organizations can be said to provide people with equitable and 
sustainable access to livelihood assets. Decentralising the UNDS requires changes to put

---

A resolution for a quiet revolution 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
27 
in place the necessary preconditions. Via UNDAF, the system-wide accountability at the 
country level would pass through the RC system and each respective country-programme 
government. 
If UNDAF were established around system-wide core competences – such as support for 
policy-making, normative and legislative work, capacity-building and pilot activities – 
tasks could be allotted to the respective agencies under a system-wide mandate partially 
secured by a system-wide funding mechanism, and the new set-up could be called “UN-
DAF+”. Such a set-up would have the advantage of not preventing the UNDS entities 
from carrying out other tasks according to their specific institutional mandates, in line 
with the requests of a given government, with funding from other sources (including exist-
ing sources).  
The QCPR process promotes better delegation of authority through the recognition of 
“Delivering as One (DaO)”, stronger support for implementation, improved UNDAFs and 
a stronger role for the RCs, especially for countries that are transitioning from needing 
relief to receiving development assistance. The UNDS operates in a context that has ex-
tended options for programming tools and allocating resources. These options range from 
sending generic requests to the UNDS to delegating greater authority for allocating re-
sources to field representatives – based on individual countries’ needs (OP 103). More 
specific requests for support for DaO countries can be made on the basis of a package of 
Standard Operating Procedures and guidance regarding mechanisms to programme, moni-
tor, evaluate, report and pool funding mechanisms with support for the RC system. All this 
would be done in accordance with existing management and accountability systems, in-
cluding the harmonization of business practices (OP 142). 
It is important to officially recognise the central role of national governments in the whole 
UNDAF process in order to become fully aligned with national priorities (OP 113). This 
means that the RC system is asked to improve its consultation with national stakeholders 
(OP 114). To avoid meaningless bureaucratisation, the 2012 QCPR Resolution calls for 
improving the UNDAF as a strategic framework, and for instituting simpler processes (OP 
117). It encourages the UNDS, where appropriate, to further improve its country-level 
joint programming processes and for specialized agencies to align their planning and 
budgeting cycles with the QCPR. Together, these measures reflect the interest of Member 
States in transforming UNDAFs into the key country-level strategic tools.  
Regarding UNDAF implementation, the 2012 QCPR Resolution reiterates the RCs’ cen-
tral role (under the leadership of the respective governments) in helping the UNDS to re-
spond more effectively to national development priorities (OP 122). In addition to stipulat-
ing the RCs’ current mandate, the resolution also specifically recognises the need to enhance 
RC planning and coordination functions (OP 126) and advocates that RCs be allowed to 
propose amendments to projects and programmes so as to bring them in line with UNDAFs 
(OP 126a). More importantly, it advocates permitting RCs to propose amendments to UN-
DAFs to align them with the UNDS’s mandate to respond to national priorities.  
The 2012 QCPR Resolution calls upon the UNDS to ensure that RCs report to national 
authorities about achieving the results specified in UNDAFs (OP 130b). The resolution 
refers to a previous GA request that RCs provide input to the performance appraisals 
of UN country-team members (OP 130c) to facilitate this process.

---

Pio Wennubst / Timo Mahn 
28 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
These steps towards making UNDAF a strategic tool require improvements in the 
managerial functions of the RC system (Mahn 2013). This includes the authorization 
to allocate funds channelled through system-wide funding mechanisms to implement 
UNDAF in country programmes to complement the existing system. For the UNDS to 
optimally exploit the enormous investments made to harmonize operations at the coun-
try level, key system-wide governance functions and central lines of accountability 
must be strengthened.  
A green light from the system – either at the inter-agency or intergovernmental level – 
seems necessary for UNDAF to become a country-level mid-term strategy (UNDAF+) 
that can be negotiated (along with the funding) with partner governments.  
4.3.4 Accountable partnerships 
In the fast-paced environment of international development, new opportunities must 
often be adopted in a system (including the UNDS) before any system-wide guidance 
has been spelled out. Recognising this, Secretary General Ban Ki-moon recently estab-
lished a number of new partnership initiatives (see Box 4), explaining: “Lasting solu-
tions to global problems no longer lie in the hands of governments alone. The United 
Nations of the 21st century must think in terms of networks and coalitions.” (UNSG 
2013) 
Recent thematic initiatives by the Secretary-General have a number of features in 
common. All are multi-stakeholder partnerships with prominent roles for the private 
sector. The UN also frequently plays catalytic, regulatory and standard-setting roles in 
these initiatives that often imply inter-sectoral alliances and eagerness to effect a para-
digm shift towards the Sustainable Development Agenda. Moreover, the initiatives 
focus on delivering direct and tangible results in the field and seek substantial innova-
tive funding outside traditional aid channels. 
The 2012 QCPR Resolution recognises that national efforts should be complemented 
by global programmes that aim to expand development opportunities (OP 11), assum-
ing that the private sector and civil society can positively contribute to achieving inter-
nationally agreed development goals (OP 16). The resolution directs that with the host 
countries’ agreement and consent, the UNDS should assist national governments in 
setting up an enabling environment in which links to civil society and the private sec-
tor are strengthened (even during UNDAF preparation processes) – with a view to 
seeking new and innovative solutions to development problems (OP 9). The resolution 
further encourages the UNDS to intensify collaboration with these stakeholders (OP 
20). It also spells out some clear concerns, reaffirming the central role of governments 
in contributing to UNDS work. At the same time it recognises UNDS capacity to en-
gage in results-oriented, innovative national, regional and global partnerships. These 
concerns, relating to the respective accountability lines and mechanisms, can be cate-
gorized as ‘trust and check’.

---

A resolution for a quiet revolution 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
29 
Box 4: 
Initiatives of the Secretary-General 
Year 
Name 
Self-description 
2010 
Every woman, 
Every child 
A global movement to mobilise and intensify “international and national 
action by governments, multilaterals, the private sector, research and 
academia, and civil society to address the major health challenges facing 
women and children”. 
2010 
Scaling up  
nutrition  
movement 
A movement founded on the principle that “all people have a right to 
food and good nutrition. It unites people from governments, civil society, 
the UN, donors, businesses and researchers in a collective effort”. 
2010 
Sustainable 
energy for all 
A global initiative to “achieve universal energy access, improve energy 
efficiency, and increase the use of renewable energy”. 
2012 
Global  
education first 
An initiative led by the Secretary-General that unites a broad spectrum of 
world leaders and advocates who “all aspire to use the transformative 
power of education to build a better future for all”. 
2010 
Every woman, 
Every child 
A global movement to mobilise and intensify “international and national 
action by governments, multilaterals, the private sector, research and 
academia, and civil society to address the major health challenges facing 
women and children”. 
Source: 
Authors, based on the initiatives’ websites 
Several of these initiatives appear to have been inspired or initiated as a result of innova-
tive work by the UN Global Compact (The Global Compact 2012a) that is mandated to 
advance universal ethical principles about human rights, labour, combating corruption and 
protecting the environment. It aims to have the private sector adhere to these principles 
and implement local integrity measures.  
Both the UNDS and recipient countries must clarify their roles in support of these global 
initiatives (the what), whose lines of accountability in the UNDS and towards recipient 
countries must also be strengthened. This entails recognising implications at the UNDAF 
level in terms of the activities and UNDS funding requirements (the how). Moreover, 
funding must be ensured beyond the traditional aid boundaries, and operating partners 
must organise common practices for applying standard procedures, implementing integrity 
measures and securing due diligence.  
It is therefore expected that a kind of system-wide global partnership structure will soon be 
created to harmonize these operating approaches (The Global Compact 2012b). Apart from 
including the UNDS contribution to the global initiatives in the UNDAFs – which should 
take place during the preparatory process, if possible – funding requirements must be in-
cluded with a system for monitoring their country-level implementation. At the central level, 
all global partnership structures should not only regularly report to ECOSOC but also help 
to improve integration at a system-wide strategic level during the next QCPR cycle. 
4.3.5 The harmonization of business practices 
Member States are sometimes quick to overlook reform efforts aimed at harmonizing 
business practices although it is an area of key importance. Aside from its potential to in-

---

Pio Wennubst / Timo Mahn 
30 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
crease efficiency and effectiveness,30 harmonized business practices are a necessary pre-
requisite for a more cohesive UNDS. It is no coincidence that the “Capacity Study” from 
1969 dwelled on the subject (UNDP 1969).  
To prepare for the QCPR negotiation process, the UN Secretariat made major efforts to 
establish empirical evidence and a substantive basis for harmonizing business practices 
(Balogun 2012a; Balogun 2012b et al.) In this regard, the 2012 QCPR Resolution aims, 
inter alia, to expand existing ‘common systems’ and establish new ones to:   
 
consolidate support services at the country level (para. 152),  
 
establish interoperable enterprise resource-planning (ERP) systems (para. 160), and 
 
anchor support services in a unified set of regulations, rules, policies and procedures 
(para. 155).  
The move to harmonize business practices throughout the UNDS seems to be in line with 
the quiet revolution called for in the most recent QCPR resolution. Its transformational 
agenda foresees establishing system-wide business practices to increase the efficiency, 
effectiveness and relevance of the UNDS. A secondary objective is enhancing transparen-
cy and establishing a capacity for the system-wide collection and usage of information to 
help focus on the overall objectives while also managing business.  
5 
System-wide funding ‘beyond aid’ 
This chapter proposes a feasible solution for uniting the what, the how and the means of 
the UNDS. A system-wide mandate requires that institutions be strengthened throughout 
the system, which can best be achieved with a system-wide funding mechanism to incen-
tivise and speed results. A first attempt took place when heads of state at the 2005 World 
Summit agreed to try to make the “World Solidarity Fund” operational – the first system-
wide funding mechanism that the UNDP was supposed to manage.31 With the internation-
al community now preparing for the paradigm shift towards the Sustainable Development 
Agenda, this debate will surely receive new impetus as soon as a new post–2015-agenda 
has been agreed.  
The existing UNDS funding system could be characterised as headquarter-centred and 
agency oriented, which was suitable for the traditional institutional setting but has reached 
its growth limits because of its supply-driven and fragmentation-inducing nature. The 
QCPR analysis shows Member States requesting demand-driven, systemic funding. Since 
a paradigm shift implies a system-wide mandate for the UNDS to support, with variable 
efforts, every country worldwide, the funding mechanism would need more support than 
available through the classic ODA rationale and resources (‘beyond aid’). It also would 
have to incentivise coherence and delegate authority within the UNDS. Once the post–
2015 framework has been agreed and the system-wide mandate spelled out, the funding 
                                                           
30  Compare with UNDOCO 2012.  
31  UN Doc. GA/RES/57/265 of 28 Feb. 2003.

---

A resolution for a quiet revolution 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
31 
implications should also become clearer – and justify holding a conference on develop-
ment financing to introduce the new mechanism. 
5.1 
The system-wide funding dilemma 
During each four-year QCPR cycle, the UNDS operates with around USD 90 to 95 billion 
(UNSG 2012a). In the last few years, the annual envelope has not varied much while the 
relative share of core and non-core contributions has changed. But agencies’ strategic 
plans relate only to core funding, which is rapidly diminishing: a reversal of this trend is 
not in sight.   
After stressing that core resources remain the bedrock of operational activities for devel-
opment because of their unified nature (OP 26), the 2012 QCPR Resolution recognises 
that Member States’ current funding practices pose challenges in terms of fragmentation 
and disincentives to adopting a UN-wide focus and strategic positioning (OP 28). Most 
funding mechanisms tend towards a supply-driven system. The reduction in the proportion 
of core contributions to funds and programmes, together with the trend towards increased 
single-donor funding for specific projects (including by non-state actors), seems to con-
firm – at least indirectly – the supply-driven character of current UNDS funding practices. 
In other words, funding increasingly tends to support specific proposals rather than the 
overall mandates of the institutions concerned.  
It can also be argued that even core contributions are fundamentally not fully of a system-
wide nature, since they relate to the mandate of a specific agency and their amount – on 
top of each country’s assessed contribution to the UN – largely depends on the priorities 
of important Member States. For example, UN Women, which is arguably the agency with 
the clearest system-wide mandate and institutional set-up in the UNDS, has to struggle to 
fund its core activities.  
The funding mechanism put in place to support the implementation of integrated UN pro-
grams in “Delivering as One” pilot countries is the most obvious effort to move towards a 
system-wide funding mechanism at country level. However, its voluntary basis has limited 
its success, since it mostly depends on a limited number of donors pooling their contribu-
tions. These and other pooled funding initiatives remain of complementary value, but do 
not constitute long-term alternatives for UNDS ‘bedrock funding’.  
The dilemma for Member States is that, beyond the individual agency mandate, core con-
tributions are not oriented to the whole system, and the few attempts at system-wide fund-
ing are based on voluntary contributions. Virtually all recent funding increases have been 
earmarked contributions (UNSG 2012a), suggesting that because the existing funding sys-
tem tends to be supply-driven and fragmented, no progress towards compliance with a 
UNDS system-wide mandate can be made. 
How can the funding requirements of a future UNDS mandate be assessed? Such attempts 
face the fundamental challenge that no system-wide analysis exists about what the world 
needs from the UNDS. While progress in harmonizing business practices and other struc-
tural measures should provide a more comprehensive picture, further analysis and assess-
ments are needed. The increase in the SG’s thematic initiatives, which go beyond the

---

Pio Wennubst / Timo Mahn 
32 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
scope and means of the current UNDS, could be signs of growing demands on the system. 
Member States can be expected to agree, especially since the 2012 QCPR Resolution re-
quests that UN funds and programmes report on concrete steps taken to broaden their do-
nor base and thus reduce reliance on a limited number of donors (OP 35). Finally, the res-
olution encourages funds and programmes to work with numerous stakeholders so as to 
diversify sources, especially for core funding (OP 37).  
It must be emphasised that Member States seem to be concerned not only with quantita-
tive aspects of funding, but especially with aligning UNDS core principles to national pri-
orities (OP 37). In a clear sign of frustration, Member States have expressed concern about 
the lack of progress in defining a ‘critical mass’ (OP 38) in the 2012 QCPR Resolution by 
reiterating its potential positive impact and calling for a set of common principles to de-
fine the critical mass of core resources in response to the needs of programme countries 
(OP 39). There seems to be a clear demand that system-wide funding must respond to the 
needs of countries, that is, be demand-driven. To make sure that their message is fully 
understood, Member States also ask the SG to report on the funding of operational activi-
ties for development and call for the system-wide application of optional incentive mech-
anisms for increasing core resources to be applied on a system-wide level (OP 55) – above 
and beyond the existing funding mechanisms. Crucially, the 2012 QCPR Resolution also 
encourages UNDS governing bodies to consolidate all available resources into bud-getary 
frameworks derived from their strategic plans (OP 41) and requests that these be included 
in a system-wide budgetary framework within the UNDAFs (OP 42). Concerning lines of 
accountability, the QCPR Resolution stresses that funding for operational activities should 
be aligned with the programme countries’ national priorities and plans (OP 34), which 
indicates a demand-driven, country-led approach. The QCPR recognises that pooled fund-
ing mechanisms are important tools for advancing “Delivering as One” (OP 135) and re-
quests the UNDS to support programme countries applying the model with an integrated 
package the includes funding (OP 141), emphasising that Member States comprehend that 
a more systematic approach will be required for future funding.  
The 2012 QCPR Resolution thus sets the stage for developing system-wide support for the 
UNDS to fulfil its mandate for the Sustainable Development Agenda. This attempt resem-
bles decentralisation processes in countries that aim to better respond to citizens’ needs – 
whereby shifting authority to the local level implies structural changes in the state appa-
ratus at both the central and local levels. Such structural changes are challenging because 
shifts in authority are usually accompanied by changes in financial flows, with part of the 
envelope that used to flow from the treasury to line ministries redirected to local authori-
ties. Past successes in adopting decentralization models show that using pilots and prepar-
ing changes in an accurate and transparent manner helps diffuse the tensions that are espe-
cially acute during the transition period.  
In the UNDS case, there seems to be scope to build on the “Delivering as One” experience 
of piloting a system-wide, country-focussed approach that was recognised by Member 
States in the 2012 QCPR Resolution. However, it seems that more work is needed, con-
sidering that UNDAFs have generally not yet become strategic, results-oriented pro-
grammes that define the UNDS response to the specific demands of individual countries.

---

A resolution for a quiet revolution 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
33 
5.2 
Proposal for a system-wide funding mechanism 
System-wide funding is intended to advance the UNDS system-wide mandate that would 
be applied in a differentiated manner, with country-led processes determining needs to be 
quantified, qualified and prioritised in a system-wide, results-oriented programming 
framework managed by RCs. Such a proposal would by no means replace existing funding 
structures because it would be focussed on the UNDS system-wide mandate instead of its 
entire development work. Should Member States mandate the UNDS to facilitate the shift 
towards sustainable development, the programming framework would encompass all 
UNDS contributions as well as the SG initiatives – in line with priorities set by local au-
thorities. Voluntary funding would continue to cover other activities regarding agency-
specific mandates.  
The system-wide financing mechanism would have to be created on the basis of existing 
approaches, including the Expanded Funding Window for “Delivering as One”, that would 
be adapted to the concept. Ideally, the mechanism would be centrally managed by an ad-
ministrative entity, such as the UNDP Multi-Partner Trust Fund Office, be steered by a 
Committee of the CEB and report to ECOSOC. The latter would operate as a system-wide 
executive board providing an appropriate level of oversight for Member States. RCs 
would manage the mechanism at the country level, using an adaptation of the UNDAF as 
its managing tool. An enhanced UNDAF is critical for ensuring that ‘demand-driven’ sys-
tem-wide funding guarantees results-oriented support for country programmes. Depending 
on the magnitude of the programme, the RC would either report directly to local authori-
ties, or to a local steering committee that in turn would be accountable to the authorities.  
The mechanism would have to define a distribution formula to allocate funds based on 
such notions as ‘critical mass’ in order to ensure adequate support, and set rules for estab-
lishing priorities if there is not enough funding. To ensure appropriate responses to the 
demands of national programmes, it would have to take into consideration principles of 
decentralisation, and it would also have to enhance the RCs’ role in allocating resources to 
UN entities based on priorities agreed with local authorities. For the particular case of 
support for countries transitioning from crisis to development, see Box 5.  
The proposal outlined above is based on the diagnosis that the debate about core versus 
non-core contributions to the UNDS will not lead to significant funding increases without 
a dramatic change of perspective. The demand-driven nature of a system-wide funding 
mechanism, along with the Member States’ clear, long-term mandate for the UNDS, 
should prevail once the managerial tools, results-based orientations and harmonized busi-
ness practices explained in the QCPR have been put in place or are being implemented. 
If regulations guaranteed access to funding for UNDS entities that comply to implement 
system-wide measures prescribed by the QCPR, the system-wide funding mechanism 
would serve to incentivise a coherent system. Such a mechanism would not only help to 
reduce the overlapping of activities and dispersion of resources that result from fund-
raising having become a primary preoccupation of the RC and UN country-team members 
but would also help eliminate the current competitive environment that promotes the 
fragmentation of activities. In the long term, once the system-wide funding mechanism’s 
functionality has been proven, it could absorb the costs of the RC system and any system-
wide structures the UNDS needs, including core contributions to funds and programmes.

---

Pio Wennubst / Timo Mahn 
34 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
In terms of their funding sources, current funding models are largely based on voluntary 
contributions from traditional donors, national contributions to national programmes 
(‘self-funding’) and South-South cooperation. Implementing the Sustainable Development 
Agenda, however, would seem to require collective efforts to overcome the recipi-
ent/provider dichotomy that mirrors the North/South divide found in many UNDS fora. 
Such an outcome would be an important by-product of an innovative financing mecha-
nism to direct funds towards sustainable-development objectives. Regular debates have 
been held in political fora about how to secure more non-earmarked funding that goes 
‘beyond aid’, such as the tax on financial transactions that was discussed in the European 
Union in early 2013. In any case, the debate about funding system-wide operations 
through innovative sources ‘beyond aid’ can only begin after the what and the how of the 
UNDS are in place.  
Box 5: Support for countries in transition under the system-wide funding mechanism 
The proposal for a system-wide ‘beyond aid’ financing mechanism depends on Member States’ political 
will to define the UNDS’s system-wide mandate. For example, it is conceivable that during the debates, 
Member States could acknowledge that the UNDS has a vital role to play in countries affected by natural 
disasters or conflicts that are transitioning from relief to development (OP 94). It bears consideration that 
the 2012 QCPR Resolution invites Member States to examine their own financing mechanisms so as to 
provide rapid and flexible financing for prevention, resilience, preparedness and response (OP 96). It 
further reiterates the need for the UNDS to take steps to strengthen the link between financing mecha-
nisms (OP 100), including delegating authority to allocate resources (OP 103), improving alignment with 
national priorities and responding more swiftly (OP 102). In terms of the system-wide funding mecha-
nism, this implies defining an up-front and pre-loaded window for fast-track funding to provide support in 
case of emergencies (including natural disasters), and for countries in transition. 
Source: 
Authors 
6 
Conclusions 
Using the 2012 QCPR Resolution as a starting point, we propose giving a new sense of 
purpose and direction to the UNDS as it adapts its business model to the ‘beyond aid’ Sus-
tainable Development Agenda. We view the QCPR process as the right instrument for this 
purpose – which was broadly confirmed when Member States were able to reach consen-
sus during the complex negotiations about the 2012 QCPR Resolution, sending a strong 
message to the UNDS that a system-wide approach was needed.  
In our assessment, the UNDS has neither a comprehensive hub to reconcile its system-
wide mandate with its operations, nor to reconcile the mandate with the means for its im-
plementation. This distinguishes the UNDS as a whole from the way each of its compo-
nents operates. While such mechanisms have long existed at the level of individual enti-
ties, they do not yet exist for the whole system. An established system-wide mandate for 
the UNDS (the what) that is not linked to its means of implementation is likely to fall 
short of its full potential, however, as is focussing on the how without defining the what. 
The main concern should be to first reconcile the system-wide mandate with the opera-
tions and then with the means of implementation.

---

A resolution for a quiet revolution 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
35 
We suggest that Member States beef up the QCPR instrument from its current limited 
function and status into a system-wide strategy, or a ‘QCPR+’ to create a cohesive UNDS 
that links the system-wide what to the how and provides further guidance about means of 
implementation. These main elements of the QCPR+ are the equivalent of a corporate 
strategy in the business world. Under this scenario, the QCPR+ and the UNDAF+ would 
embody the UNDS system-wide strategy at UN headquarters and in the field. 
6.1 
A feasible evolution in the QCPR cycle 
The linkage between mandate and strategic guidance and operations would greatly benefit 
from an improved sequencing of events. Below we outline four elements to implement the 
proposal.  
First, the UN Secretariat’s Department of Economic and Social Affairs (DESA) should 
gradually be given more authority to monitor activities and progress with regard to im-
plementing the 2012 QCPR Resolution at the central and country levels. Under the SG’s 
guidance, DESA should continue to assure improved analysis in system-wide reports on 
UN funding, performance, programme results and operational activities for development, 
including the comparison of system-wide data, definition and classifications – as outlined 
in the 2012 QCPR (OP 187). The growing number of specific requests and mandates in 
QCPR resolutions underscores the need to rigorously monitor their implementation. For 
this, DESA preparatory work will be crucial.  Member States should play a proactive role 
by introducing coherent, system-wide messages to UN governing bodies, whether they are 
based in New York, Geneva, Rome, Vienna, Paris, Copenhagen or Nairobi. 
Second, the 2012 QCPR Resolution called for an independent system-wide evaluation 
mechanism to focus on key UNDS mandates; this would provide information to gov-
erning bodies and help UNDG members promote system-wide mandates in their opera-
tions. The 2012 QCPR Resolution reaffirmed the need to strengthen independent, im-
partial, system-wide evaluation of operational activities for development (OP 176) by 
enhancing existing mechanisms (OP 177) and requested the SG to establish an interim, 
multi-stakeholder mechanism to coordinate independent system-wide evaluations 
about a pilot evaluation mechanism to be submitted to ECOSOC in 2013 (OP 181). 
The 2012 QCPR Resolution also requested the JIU to make a system-wide evaluation 
of the Action Plan of Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women. No system-
wide evaluation of UNDAFs is foreseen, but the 2012 QCPR Resolution requests 
funds and programmes and encourages specialized agencies to increase their use and 
evaluation of UNDAFs (OP 182). However, these mandates appear to be incoherent: 
How could any non-system-wide body independently evaluate a system-wide frame-
work like UNDAF? This indicates that more thought is needed about how to strength-
en accountability lines so countries will accept UNDAFs as strategic frameworks for 
operations.  
Third, fully aligning UNDS-entity planning processes with the QCPR cycle results in bet-
ter strategic guidance for operations. A complete QCPR cycle usually lasts around five 
years. It starts with preparations for the next cycle beginning in year ‘0’. During this year, 
unlike in other years, ECOSOC does not adopt a follow-up resolution to the previous 
QCPR. Instead, the SG prepares a report with recommendations that serves as an input for

---

36 
the ‘z
that ye
tem-w
the fun
govern
QCPR
QCPR
mentin
cycle 
pare a
QCPR
Fourth
the fou
that M
in the
avoid 
wise t
prepar
Figur
 
Sourc
 
zero’ draft o
ear’s GA an
wide guidan
nds, progra
ning bodies
R resolution
R is adopted
ng the 4-ye
– which is 
a new QCP
R cycle. 
h, the progr
ur-year QC
Member Stat
e future is t
a big gap b
to introduce
rations are b
re 3: 
The Q
e: 
Authors 
Germa
of the upco
nd if all goe
nce in the re
ammes and s
s, taking in
n. The first 
d during the
ear cycle of 
the third ye
R resolutio
ramming cy
CPR cycle, w
tes should d
the review o
between tha
e the revise
being made
QCPR cycle 
an Developme
oming QCP
es well, is a
esolution he
specialized 
nto consider
of a series
e ECOSOC
the strategi
ear that stra
n begins. F
ycles of mo
which mean
deliver in th
of the UND
at review an
ed mandate
for the new
ent Institute / D
PR Resolutio
approved at 
elps in dev
agencies th
ration the s
s of three a
C in year ‘1
ic plans. In
ategic plans
Figure 3 pro
ost UNDS e
ns that the U
he form of a 
DS system-
nd the elabo
e in an HLP
w QCPR.  
Deutsches Ins
on. The res
the end of 
eloping the
hat are then 
system-wid
annual resol
’. In year ‘
n the fourth
s are implem
ovides a sch
entities hav
UNDS is pre
QCPR+. W
wide mand
ration of th
PF Declarat
Pio We
titut für Entw
solution is n
year ‘0’. In
e strategic f
approved b
de guidance
lutions on i
2’, the QCP
(and last) y
mented – a 
hematic ove
ve already b
epared for s
What needs t
date at the p
he strategic p
tion during 
ennubst / Tim
wicklungspoliti
negotiated 
n year ‘1’, th
four-year pl
by their resp
e provided 
implementi
CPR begins 
year of the 
new cycle 
erview of t
been aligne
strategic gu
to be incorp
political lev
plans, it wo
g year ‘0’ –
mo Mahn 
ik (DIE) 
during 
he sys-
lans of 
pective 
by the 
ing the 
imple-
QCPR 
to pre-
he full 
ed with 
uidance 
porated 
vel. To 
ould be 
– when

---

A resolution for a quiet revolution 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
37 
Given the QCPR cycle, Member States could implement this proposal in the following steps:  
 
2013–14: QCPR implementation focuses on key system-wide priorities to be decided 
at the CEB level and included in the strategic plans of the funds and programmes.  
 
2014: Preparatory work, including legal advice on strengthening system-wide ac-
countability lines and decision-making at country and headquarters levels. This in-
cludes revamping UNDAFs, linking funding to priorities, and setting up a monitoring 
system and a more authoritative, managerial CEB mandate that includes the UNDG.  
 
2014: A resolution is adopted to revise and upgrade ECOSOC’s system-wide deci-
sion-making functions, with better oversight of system-wide global partnerships.  
 
2015–16: Preparation of the HLPF Analysis on the comparative advantages of the 
UNDS (2015) and the Declaration of its system-wide mandate (2016) for the next 
QCPR cycle. 
 
2016: Preparation of system-wide funding for the UNDS mandate to support sustain-
able development. 
 
2016: Negotiations of a new QCPR+ Resolution to replace the current QCPR on the 
basis of the above-mentioned HLPF Declaration.  
 
2017: Convening an international conference on system-wide ‘beyond aid’ financing 
of the UN mandate to support the Sustainable Development Agenda, and preparations 
to make the fund operational in 2018. 
6.2 
Outlook 
While negotiating the 2012 QCPR Resolution, Member States swung from a minimalist 
target of ‘securing low-hanging fruits’ to near-agreement on a ‘daring-to-fly-high’ agenda. 
Discussions focussed on preparatory work to analyse the elements of a system-wide gov-
ernance mechanism, building on the System-wide Coherence process (GA/RES/64/289) in 
conjunction with the evolution of the post–2015 and SDG processes – in other words, with 
the UNDS’s future mandate. 
Even though such an agreement proved beyond reach during the 2012 round of negotia-
tions, it was clear that this future debate is unavoidable. A pragmatic way to prepare for 
the next QCPR cycle would be to proceed with what is within reach and in line with the 
outcomes of the 2012 QCPR Resolution.  
The future of QCPR resolutions lies in moving from a limited policy review to a system-
wide strategy for sustainable development – the QCPR+ – that would define the mandate, 
operations, structure, partnerships and financial means for a four-year cycle of UNDS op-
erations moving towards implementing a Sustainable Development Agenda ‘beyond aid’.

---



---

A resolution for a quiet revolution 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
39 
 
Bibliography  
Anstee, M. J. (2012): Millennium Development Goals : milestones on a long road, in: R. Wilkins / D. Hulme 
(eds.), The Millennium Development Goals and beyond : global development after 2015, London: 
Routledge  
Balogun, P. (2012a): The relevance, effectiveness and efficiency of the United Nations Development 
Assistance Framework (UNDAF) : a report prepared for the United Nations Department of Economic 
and Social Affairs; online: http://www.un.org/esa/coordination/pdf/undaf_report.pdf 
– (2012b): The UNDAF : presentation at the UNITAR seminar; online: http://www.un.org/esa/coordination/ 
pdf/UNITAR_FEB_22_BALOGUN_PRESENTATION_V2.pdf (accessed 31 Oct. 2013) 
Browne, S. (2011): The UN development program and system, London: Routledge  
– (2012): The UN development system : the case for reform : power point presentation; online: http://future 
un.org/unog-library-talks-united-nations-development-the-case-for-reform/ (accessed 31 Oct. 2013) 
Childers, E. / B. Urquhart (1994): Renewing the United Nations system, Uppsala: Dag Hammarskjöld 
Foundation  
Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety (2011): General informa-
tion : transformation of our energy system, Berlin; online: www.bmu.de/P118-1/ (accessed 31 Oct. 
2013) 
Fomerand, J. (2003): Mirror, tool, or linchpin for change? : the UN and development, New York: Academic 
Council on the United Nations System (International Relations Studies and the United Nations 
Occasional Papers 2); online: http://acuns.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/06/MirrorToolorLinchpinfor 
Change.pdf (accessed 31 Oct. 2013) 
Government of Ethiopia (2011): The path to sustainable development : Ethiopia's climate-resilient green 
economy strategy, Addis Ababa: Environmental Protection Authority 
Helliwell, J. / R. Layard / J. Sachs (2012): World happiness report, New York: Earth Institute  
Hill, F. (2010): The future of the UN development system : conference report; online: http://futureun.org/ 
wp-content/uploads/wp1033-report.pdf (accessed 31 Oct. 2013) 
Hoff, H. (2011): Understanding the nexus : background paper for the Bonn 2011 conference; online: 
http://www.water-energy-food.org/en/whats_the_nexus/background.html (accessed 31 Oct. 2013) 
Jenks, B. et al. (2005): The case for a United Nations development pillar, mimeo 
JIU (Joint Inspection Unit) (2012): Strategic planning in the United Nations system, Geneva 
Jolly, R. / L. Emmerij / T. G. Weiss (2009): UN ideas that changed the World, Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana 
University Press 
Magnuson, J. (2013): The approaching great transformation : toward a livable post carbon economy, New 
York: Seven Stories Press 
Mahn, T. (2012): New challenges, new partners, a new UN development system? : conference report, Wilton 
Park; online: http://www.wiltonpark.org.uk/resources/en/pdf/22290903/2012/ wp1183-report (accessed 
31 Oct. 2013) 
– (2013): Country-level aid coordination at the United Nations – taking the resident coordinator system 
forward, Bonn: DIE (Studies 77) 
Maslow, A. (1966): The psychology of science : a reconnaissance, 1st ed., New York: Harper & Row  
Melamed, C. / A. Scott / T. Mitchell (2012): Separated at birth, reunited in Rio? : a roadmap to bring 
environment and development back together, London: Overseas Development Institute (Background 
Note May 2012) 
Mitrany, D. (1966): A working peace system, Chicago, Ill.: Quadrangle Press  
Nordic UN Project (1991): The United Nations : issues and options : five studies on the role of the UN in the 
economic and social fields commissioned by the Nordic UN project, Stockholm: Almqvist & Wiksell 
International  
Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the UN (2011): The PGA handbook : a practical guide to the United 
Nations 
General 
Assembly, 
New 
York; 
online: 
http://www.unitar.org/ny/sites/unitar.org.ny/ 
files/UN_PGA_Handbook.pdf (accessed 14 Nov. 2013)

---

Pio Wennubst / Timo Mahn 
40 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
– (2013a): ECOSOC-Tagungsstruktur, internal document 
– (2013b): QCPR note 1, internal document 
– (2013c): QCPR note 2, internal document 
– (2013d): QCPR note 3, internal document 
– (2013e): QCPR note 4, internal document 
– (2013f): QCPR note 5, internal document 
– (2013g): QCPR note 6, internal document 
Raworth, K. (2012): A safe and just space for humanity : can we live within the doughnut?, Oxford: Oxfam; 
online: 
http://www.oxfam.org/sites/www.oxfam.org/files/dp-a-safe-and-just-space-for-humanity-
130212-en.pdf (accessed 31 Oct. 2013) 
Righter, R. (1995): Utopia lost : the United Nations and world order, New York: Twentieth Century Fund 
Press  
Rochester, J. M. (1993): Waiting for the millennium : The United Nations and the future of world order, in: 
Canadian Journal of Political Science 27 (4), 864–865 
Rockstrom, J. et al. (2009): A safe operating space for humanity, in: Nature 461 (7263), 472–475; online: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/461472a  (accessed 14 Nov. 2013) 
Schweizerische Eidgenossenschaft (2013): Energiestrategie 2050, Bern: Eidgenössisches Departement für 
Umwelt, Verkehr, Energie und Kommunikation; online: http://www.bfe.admin.ch/themen/00526/ 
00527/?lang=de&dossier_id=05024 (accessed 31 Oct. 2013) 
Steffen, W. / P. J. Crutzen / J. R. McNeill (2007): The anthropocene : are humans now overwhelming the 
great forces of nature?, in: AMBIO: A Journal of the Human Environment 36 (8), 614–621; online: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1579/0044-7447(2007)36[614:TAAHNO]2.0.CO;2 (accessed 14 Nov. 2013) 
Thakur, R. / T. G. Weiss (2009): The UN and global governance : an unfinished journey, Bloomington, Ind.: 
Indiana University Press 
The Global Compact (2012a): Catalyzing transformational partnerships between the UN & business, 
Switzerland (Conference Background Note) 
– (2012b): Operationalizing the UN partnership facility (Agenda Task Force Session), mimeo 
UN Conference on Environment and Development (1992): Rio declaration on environment and devel-
opment; online: http://habitat.igc.org/agenda21/rio-dec.html (accessed 31 Oct. 2013) 
UN System Task Team (2012): Realizing the future we want for all : report to the Secretary-General, New 
York: UN System Task Team on the Post–2015 UN Development Agenda  
UNDOCO (United Nations Development Operations Coordination Office) (2012): The impact of UN 
coordination : stories from the field : synthesis of 2011/12 resident coordinator annual reports, New 
York; online: http://rconline.undg.org/EXTERNAL/undg/UNDG_AR_Layout_ R5.pdf (accessed 31 
Oct. 2013) 
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme) (1969): A study of the capacity of the United Nations 
development system : Jackson report, Vol. 1, 2, New York 
UNGA (United Nations General Assembly) (2012): The future we want (General Assembly Resolution 
A/RES/66/288) 
– (2013): Lessons learned from the Commission on Sustainable Development : an advance unedited version; 
online: http://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/1676SG%20report%20on%20CSD% 
20lessons%20learned_advance%20unedited%20copy_26%20Feb%2013.pdf (accessed 31 Oct. 2013) 
UNS (United Nations Secretariat) (2012): Informal note 1 : the relationship between the GA resolution on 
the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of UN operational activities for development and the 
specialized agencies, 7. Nov. 2012; online: http://www.un.org/esa/coordination/pdf/information _note _ 
1-relation_btw_ga_and_sas.pdf (accessed 31.Oct. 2013) 
UNSG (United Nations Secretary General) (2009): Functioning of the resident coordinator system, including 
costs and benefits (Report of the Secretary-General E/2009/76)

---

A resolution for a quiet revolution 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
41 
– (2012a): Analysis of funding of operational activities for development of the United Nations system for 
the year 2010 : an advance, unedited version, New York: Department for Social and Economic Affairs; 
online: http://www.un.org/esa/coordination/pdf/2012_funding_report-figures_and_tables.pdf (accessed 
31 Oct. 2013) 
– (2012b): Quadrennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development of the United 
Nations system : an advance, unedited version, New York; online: http://www.un.org/esa/coordination/ 
pdf/sg_report_for_2012_qcpr.pdf (accessed 31 Oct. 2013) 
– (2012c): Quadrennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development of the United 
Nations system: recommendations : an advance, unedited version; online: http://www.un.org/esa/ 
coordination/pdf/sg_qcpr_report_adv_unedited_version.pdf (accessed 31 Oct. 2013) 
– (2012d): The Secretary-General’s five-year action agenda, New York: United Nations 
– (2013): Secretary-General’s address to the General Assembly on 22 January 2013; online: http:// 
www.un.org/sg/statements/index.asp?nid=6563 (accessed 31 Oct. 2013) 
Vatterodt, M. (2008): The implementation of the Paris declaration on aid effectiveness by the United Nations 
: progress to date and need for further reforms, Bonn: DIE (Studies 35) 
Weinlich, S. (2011): Reforming development cooperation at the United Nations : an analysis of policy 
position and actions of key states on reform options, Bonn: DIE (Studies 59) 
World Commission on Environment and Development (1987): Our common future, Oxford

---



---

Annex

---



---

A resolution for a quiet revolution 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
45 
Annex 1: 
Categorization – Addressees of CPR resolutions 
United Nations Development System 
Operational activities for development of the UNDS 
Agencies and the United Nations development system 
Development cooperation programmes of the United Nations system 
Members of the United Nations development system 
Operational activities of the United Nations 
Organizations and bodies of the United Nations system 
Organizations of the United Nations development system 
Organizations of the United Nations  system engaged in operational activities for development 
Organizations of the United Nations development system, in particular UN Women 
Organizations of the United Nations system 
Organizations of the United Nations system, including those with no field level representations, 
and the regional commissions 
Organs and organizations of the United Nations system 
Organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system 
Organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system engaged in operational activities 
for development 
United Nations 
United Nations Development Group 
United Nations development system 
United Nations development system, including its agencies, funds and programmes 
United Nations operational system 
United Nations system including the funds, programmes and specialized agencies 
United Nations system 
United Nations System Chief Executive Board for Coordination of the United Nations system-
wide policy on gender equality and the empowerment of women and strategy on gender main-
streaming 
United Nations system, including the fund and programmes, the specialized agencies and the  
Secretariat 
Intergovernmental 
All relevant governing bodies, in particular the Governing Council of the United Nations  
Development Programme 
Economic and Social Council 
Executive boards and governing bodies of the funds, programmes and specialized agencies 
Executive boards and secretariats of the United Nations Development Programme and United 
Nations Populations Fund and the United Nations Children’s Fund  
Executive boards of the funds and programmes 
Executive boards of the funds and programmes and the governing bodies of the specialized agencies 
Executive Boards of the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Populations 
Fund, the United Nations Children’s Fund and UN Women 
Executive boards of the United Nations funds, programmes and specialized agencies 
Governing bodies of (all) funds, programmes and specialized agencies

---

Pio Wennubst / Timo Mahn 
46 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
Annex 1 (cont.): 
Categorization – Addressees of CPR resolutions 
Intergovernmental (cont.) 
Governing bodies of all organizations of the United Nations development system 
Governing bodies of the (relevant) organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system 
Governing bodies of the organizations of the United Nations system 
Governing bodies of the organizations of the United Nations system concerned with activities for 
development 
Governing bodies of the organizations United Nations development system 
Governing bodies of the relevant organizations 
Governing bodies of the specialized agencies and other relevant United Nations entities 
Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme 
President of the Economic and Social Council 
States members of the governing bodies of all organs organizations and bodies of the United  
Nations system 
United Nations System Chief Executives Boards for Coordination 
United Nations System Chief Executives Boards for Coordination in the United Nations  
Development Group 
Interagency 
Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme 
Country offices and the resident coordinators 
Department of Technical Cooperation for Development 
Development agencies of the United Nations system 
Entities of the United Nations system 
Executive Committee of the United Nations Development Group 
Executive heads of all the organizations concerned 
Executive heads of the funding organizations 
Executive heads of the organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system 
Executive heads of the United Nations funding and technical agencies 
Field offices 
Funding agencies of the United Nations system 
Funding organizations 
Funding, technical and specialized agencies 
Funds, programmes and specialized agencies 
Funds and programmes 
Funds and programmes and specialized agencies of the United Nations system 
Funds, programmes and agencies of the United Nations development system 
Funds, programmes and specialized agencies and other entities of the United Nations development 
system at the regional level and the regional commissions 
Funds, programmes and specialized agencies and other entities of the United Nations system 
Heads of the specialized agencies, the United Nations funds and programmes and the regional 
commissions

---

A resolution for a quiet revolution 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
47 
Annex 1 (cont.): 
Categorization – Addressees of CPR resolutions 
Interagency (cont.) 
Joint Consultative Group on Policies 
Member organizations of the United Nations Development Group, in particular the member  
organizations represented in its Executive Committee 
Organizations of the United Nations development system, its regional commissions and other 
regional and subregional entities 
Organizations participating in programming 
Programmes and projects in low-income countries 
Regional commissions as well as interregional, regional and subregional cooperation 
Regional commissions as well as the funds, programmes, specialized agencies and other entities of 
the United Nations development system at the regional level 
Relevant United Nations entities 
Resident coordinator system 
Resident coordinator 
Resident coordinator system and the United Nations country teams 
Resident coordinator, the specialized agencies, small technical agencies, the regional commissions 
and organizations of the United Nation system with field-level representation 
Resident coordinator/humanitarian coordinator system 
Resident coordinators and the United Nations country teams 
Separate sectoral and specialized entities, funds, programmes and specialized agencies 
Special Unit for South–South Cooperation 
Specialized agencies 
Specialized and technical agencies 
UN Women 
United Nations agency 
United Nations Development Assistance Framework 
United Nations Development funds and programmes 
United Nations Development Programme 
United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Fund for Population Activities, the 
United Nations Children’s Fund and the World Food Programme 
United Nations Development Programme, The United Nations Population Fund, the United Na-
tions Children’s Fund and the United Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women 
(UN Women) 
United Nations Evaluation Group 
United Nations funds and programmes, the specialized agencies as well as centres of excellence in 
the South 
United Nations funds, programmes and agencies 
United Nations funds, programmes and specialized agencies, including non-resident agencies 
United Nations Office for South–South Cooperation 
United Nations regional commissions 
United Nations system at the country level 
United Nations system country team

---

Pio Wennubst / Timo Mahn 
48 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
Annex 1 (cont.): 
Categorization – Addressees of CPR resolutions 
Secretariat 
Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation 
Joint Inspection Unit 
Secretariat 
Secretary-General 
Other 
(all) Governments 
Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme; President of the World Bank; 
heads of regional development banks 
All countries 
All countries that are able to do so 
All Governments 
All Member States and the organizations of the United Nations development system 
Bilateral donors and the United Nations system 
Countries, including donor and programme countries 
Developed countries 
Donor countries 
Donors and recipient countries 
Donors and countries in a position to do so 
General Assembly 
Governments and organizations of the United Nations system 
Heads of organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system 
International community 
International community and relevant United Nations entities, including the International Strategy 
for Disaster Reduction, the United Nations funds and programmes, as well as the specialized  
agencies 
International financial institutions and other development partners 
Joint Consultative Group on Policies and to the maximum extent possible the specialized agencies 
Joint Consultative Group on Policies, the funding organizations of the United Nations system,  
the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations system, the United Nations  
Population Fund, the World Food Programme and the International Fund for Agricultural  
Development and the fund administered by the United Nations Development Programme 
Joint Inspection Unit, the United Nations Evaluation Group, and the Office for the Coordination of 
Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of Internal Oversight Services and the Department of Economic 
and Social Affairs of the Secretariat 
Major donor countries 
Member States 
Member States and relevant United Nations organizations 
Member States and the United Nations development system 
Member States and the United Nations system

---

A resolution for a quiet revolution 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
49 
Annex 1 (cont.): 
Categorization – Addressees of CPR resolutions 
Other (cont.) 
Member States and United Nations funds and programmes 
National governments 
National Governments, relevant United Nations development agencies, including specialized  
agencies and other relevant stakeholders 
Organizations of the United Nations development system its regional commissions and other  
regional and subregional entities 
Other countries 
Programmes, funds and specialized agencies of the United Nations system, and other relevant 
entities, such as international financial institutions and the United Nations Conference on Trade 
and Development 
Recipient countries 
Recipient countries and the organizations of the United Nations system 
Recipient governments 
Secretary-General and the United Nations development system 
United Nations agencies and the donor community 
United Nations Development Programme and the Department of Technical Cooperation for  
Development of the United Nations Secretariat 
United Nations humanitarian entities, other relevant humanitarian organizations, development 
partners, the private sector, donor countries and affected States 
United Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities 
United Nations system and the Bretton Woods institutions 
World Bank Group 
World Bank, regional development banks and all funds and programmes 
World Food Programme, executive boards of the United Nations Development Programme/United 
Nations Populations Fund, United Nations Children’s Fund 
Note:  
This analysis included all addressees in consecutively numbered operational paragraphs. When the  
addressee was not mentioned, the cases were included in the category ‘other’.

---

Pio Wennubst / Timo Mahn 
50 
German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE) 
Annex 2: 
UNDS Entities 
Specialized agencies (14) 
Food and Agriculture  
Organization (FAO) 
International Civil Aviation 
Organization (ICAO) 
International Fund for  
Agricultural Development (IFAD) 
International Labour  
Organization (ILO) 
International Maritime  
Organization (IMO) 
International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA) 
International  
Telecommunications Union 
(ITU) 
United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural  
Organization (UNESCO) 
United Nations Industrial  
Development Organization  
(UNIDO) 
Universal Postal Union (UPU) 
World Health Organization 
(WHO) 
World Intellectual Property  
Organization (WIPO) 
World Meteorological  
Organization (WMO) 
World Tourism Organization 
(UNWTO) 
 
Funds and programmes (14) 
UN Development Programme 
(UNDP) 
UNDP – UN Capital  
Development Fund (UNCDF) 
UNDP – UN Volunteers  
programme (UNV) 
UN Children’s Fund (UNICEF) 
UN Population Fund (UNFPA) 
World Food Programme (WFP) 
Office of the UN High Commis-
sioner for Refugees (UNHCR) 
UN Office on Drugs and Crime 
(UNODC) 
UN Conference on Trade and 
Development (UNCTAD) 
UNCTAD – International Trade 
Centre (ITC) 
UN Entity for Gender Equality 
and the Empowerment of  
Women (UN Women) 
UN Relief and Works Agency 
for Palestine Refugees in the 
Near East (UNRWA) 
UN Environment Programme 
(UNEP) 
UN Human Settlements  
Programme (UN-HABITAT) 
 
Research and training institutions (6) 
UN Interregional Crime and 
Justice Research Institute 
(UNICRI) 
UN Institute for Disarmament 
Research (UNIDIR)  
UN Institute for Training and 
Research (UNITAR) 
UN Research Institute for Social 
Development (UNRISD) 
UN System Staff College 
(UNSSC) 
UN University (UNU) 
Others (3) 
Joint United Nations Programme 
on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) 
UN International Strategy for 
Disaster Reduction (UNISDR) 
UN Office for Project Services 
(UNOPS)

---

Publications of the German Development Institute 
Studies 
78 
Reeg, Caroline: Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise Upgrading in India: 
learning from success cases, 299 pp., Bonn 2013, ISBN 978-88985-585-5 
77 
Mahn, Timo: Country-Level Aid Coordination at the United Nations – Taking 
the Resident Coordinator System Forward, 146 pp., Bonn 2013, ISBN 978-3-
88985-584-8 
76 
Loewe, Markus et al.: Which Factors Determine the Upgrading of Small and 
Medium-Sized Enterprises (SMEs)? The case of Egypt, 288 pp., Bonn 2013, 
ISBN 978-3-88985-583-1 
75 
Mallik, Vidyadhar: Local and Community Governance for Peace and Develop-
ment in Nepal, 179 pp., Bonn 2013, ISBN 978-3-88985-582-4 
74 
Brandi, Clara et al.: Sustainability Certification in the Indonesian Palm Oil 
Sector: Benefits and challenges for smallholders, 258 pp., Bonn 2013, ISBN 
978-3-88985-581-7 
73 
Klingebiel, Stephan: Entwicklungszusammenarbeit – eine Einführung, 86 pp., 
Bonn 2013, ISBN 978-3-88985-580-0 
[Price: EUR 10.00; books may be ordered from the DIE or through bookshops.] 
 
 
Discussion Papers 
21/2013 Hampel-Milagrosa, Aimée / Markus Loewe / Caroline Reeg: Which Factors 
Determine the Upgrading of Micro, Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises? Evi-
dence from Egypt, India and the Philippines, 24 pp., Bonn 2013, ISBN 978-
3-88985-604-3 
20/2013 Schmitz, Birgit: Macroprudential Financial Market Regulation, 38 pp., Bonn 
2013, ISBN 978-3-88985-602-9 
19/2013 Klingebiel, Stephan: Multilateral Aid: Structural change and donor preferences, 
14 pp., Bonn 2013, ISBN 978-3-88985-601-2 
18/2013 Janus, Heiner / Stephan Klingebiel / Sebastian Paulo: Beyond Aid: Konzep-
tionelle Überlegungen zum Wandel der Entwicklungszusammenarbeit, 19 pp., 
Bonn 2013, ISBN 978-3-88985-600-5 
17/2013 Keijzer, Niels: Unfinished Agenda or Overtaken by Events? Applying aid- and 
development-effectiveness principles to capacity development support, 65 pp., 
Bonn 2013, ISBN 978-3-88985-620-3 
16/2013 Lundsgaarde, Erik: Bureaucratic Pluralism and the Transformation of Devel-
opment Cooperation, 29 pp., Bonn 2013, ISBN 978-3-88985-619-7 
[Price: EUR 6.00; books may be ordered from the DIE or through bookshops.] 
A complete list of publications available from the DIE can be found at: 
http://www.die-gdi.de