Reform of the United Nations Development System    APRIL 2013    
1
REFORM OF THE UNITED NATIONS 
DEVELOPMENT SYSTEM 
One of the most needed and challenging el­
ement of the UN reform agenda is the im­
provement of the coherence, efficiency and 
effectiveness of the UN development sys­
tem. Numerous reform processes have been 
launched in the past two decades focusing 
both at headquarter and at country level. The 
establishment of UN Women and the spread­
ing of the Delivering as One approach are 
among the fruits of these important efforts. 
Switzerland traditionally plays a key role in 
this endeavour through regularly facilitat­
ing the only resolution that provides overall 
guidance to the UN development operations. 
In December 2012 after two months of ne­
gotiations, the adoption of this quadrennial 
system-wide landmark resolution is providing 
a great opportunity for a consistent break­
through in the right direction. 
REFORM ACHIEVEMENTS 
The reform of the United Nations is a subject of con­
stant political debates in which positions often di­
verge. There is however consensus on the need to 
enhance the coherence, effectiveness and efficiency 
of the UN’s operational activities. 
Delivering as One 
In 1997, Secretary General Kofi Annan launched a 
reform process geared towards these goals and in 
2006, a High Level Panel on UN system-wide coher­
ence launched a landmark report called “Delivering as 
One”. Among several recommendations, it proposed 
a new business model to organize UN operational 
activities for development in a given country. Eight 
countries volunteered to implement it as pilots, sub­
sequently convincing others to follow. In these coun­
tries, the UN operational system for development acts 
as “One UN” by following four main objectives. 
One Leader: The Resident Coordinator who co­
ordinates all UN development activities in a pro­
gram country should be given more authority and 
FACTSHEET
Global Institutions Divison   April 2013
resources. By assuming comprehensive strategic 
leadership, the Resident Coordinator can act as a 
link between national authorities, the UN and other 
partners. 
One Programme: Under the leadership of the Resi­
dent Coordinator and based on the country’s nation­
ally-owned development strategy, a joint country 
program is to be defined. Such a “One Programme” 
draws on the full range of UN expertise and enables 
UN organizations to better focus on activities accord­
ing to their comparative advantages.
One Budget: UN development organizations ought 
to use a common financial framework at country level. 
Coordinated financial planning provides governments 
and partners with transparent information on all UN 
activities as well as on funding sources and gaps. 
One Office: In order to increase efficiency and to 
lower expenses for administration, business proce­
dures and policies must be harmonized, simplified 
and unified. When relevant, premises and services 
should be shared between UN organizations. 
As suggested by the rising popularity of the “De­
livering as One” approach, governments of partner 
countries generally appreciate its positive impacts, 
in particular in terms of increasing national owner­
ship and alignment with national priorities. To more 
systematically assess the value added by this organi­
zational model in the eight pilot countries, member 
states mandated an independent evaluation which 
took place in 2011-2012. It showed that in order to 
tap the full potential of better coordination in the 
field, further steps of reform are needed. Among 
other points, the evaluation recommended that the 
United Nations Development Group provide fur­
ther guidance on joint planning and monitoring and 
evaluation systems as well as support the use of a 
common budgetary framework. It also stressed the 
need for more far-reaching harmonization of busi­
ness practices, notably in financial management, ac­
counting standards and human resources rules and 
regulations.

---

Reform of the United Nations Development System    APRIL 2013    
2
inefficiencies through high expenses for administra­
tion, coordination and reporting. 
An example of the consequences of fragmentation 
is the 17,000 reports annually produced by the UN 
development system. By reducing fragmentation 
and refocusing reporting, resources could be reallo­
cated in favour of partner countries. In addition, this 
would facilitate more effective monitoring by mem­
ber states.
Funding: In the recent years, the ratio of core finan­
cial contributions to the budgets of UN organizations 
has declined relative to earmarked contributions 
(contributions for specific themes or regions). The 
relative increase of earmarked financial contribu­
tions tends to limit the ability of UN agencies to fully 
comply with their mandates, threatens their financial 
sustainability and fosters fragmentation. 
Complexity of business practices: One of the 
limiting factors to the implementation of the “De­
livering as One” approach is the diversity of business 
practices between UN organizations. Handling the 
multitude of procedures and directives raises trans­
action costs of coordinating operational activities of 
UN agencies. Inconsistencies in planning, funding, 
reporting and evaluation across the UN development 
system threaten to undermine efforts to enhance 
coherence, effectiveness and efficiency for better 
development results. Furthermore, and despite im­
portant progress in rationalization, the complexity of 
business processes could still be decreased.
Accountability for results and transparency: 
Enhancing the effectiveness of the UN operational 
activities for development requires a coherent moni­
toring and evaluation of results. Information on sys­
tem-wide results is still difficult to obtain for donor 
and partner countries. UN funds and agencies often 
struggle to report on results and make insufficient 
use of standard indicators. This largely complicates 
the analysis of results from the field and the collec­
tion of global information on results achieved on 
specific themes. 
Photo credits: 
United Nations Development Programme / Prakash Hatvalne
Besides the “Delivering as One” approach, the willing­
ness of UN member states to increase system-wide 
coherence was repeatedly expressed in specific reso­
lutions and in Executive Board decisions. Concrete 
efficiency gains were achieved by rationalizing some 
administrative services. In addition, institutional frag­
mentation was reduced by merging four UN organiza­
tions related to Gender into UN Women in 2010. 
The quadrennial comprehensive 
policy review (QCPR)
The main normative instrument for reforming the UN 
development system is the quadrennial comprehen­
sive policy review (QCPR). Following an assessment 
of progress, this General Assembly resolution which 
designs and gives mandates to the UN system to bet­
ter address reform objectives is negotiated every four 
years. The most recent QCPR (resolution 67/226) was 
adopted in December 2012. 
This consensus document covers three major the­
matic areas, among which funding of operational 
activities and improving the functioning of the UN 
development system are essential to the UN reform.
 
Apart from these topics which are treated here, the 
2012 QCPR also stresses the transversal importance 
of certain development goals (e.g. poverty reduc­
tion, gender equality). In addition, south-south co­
operation and the development of national capaci­
ties are promoted.
The QCPR resolution addresses direct binding man­
dates to Funds and Programmes of the UN develop­
ment system and recommendations to Specialized 
Agencies as they are autonomous organizations. The 
Specialized Agencies are also part of the UN Eco­
nomic and Social Council (ECOSOC) and therefore 
expected to implement the reforms. For the SDC, 
this means that most of its priority organizations1 are 
legally bound by the QCPR. 
REMAINING CHALLENGES 
Reforming the UN development system is ambitious. 
The QCPR addresses the four most important chal­
lenges to promote a more efficient, effective and 
coherent operational development system: 
Fragmentation: The UN development system con­
sists of a complex web of organizations. Their man­
dates partly overlap and their activities have become 
thematically and geographically dispersed. This frag­
mentation of institutions and activities challenges 
the coherence of operational activities, incurs high 
transaction costs on recipient countries and entails 
1	 The following priority organizations of the SDC are bound 
by the 2012 QCPR resolution: UN WOMEN, UNAIDS, UNDP, 
UNFPA, UNHABITAT, UNHCR, UNICEF, UNRWA, WFP

---

Reform of the United Nations Development System    APRIL 2013    
3
OPPORTUNITIES OF THE QCPR 2012 
Most of the 187 mandates contained in the 2012 
QCPR resolution address the functioning and fund­
ing of the UN development system. They offer ap­
proaches to meet the challenges mentioned above: 
Coordination of operational activities: The 
QCPR formally approved “Delivering as One” as 
an approach that program countries can voluntar­
ily request. To support countries having adopted it, 
integrated and specifically tailored packages of sup­
port are planned to be provided. These packages will 
enhance coordination between UN organizations at 
country level by introducing standard operating pro­
cedures and pooled funding mechanisms as well as 
by providing guidance on “Delivery as One”-specific 
programming, monitoring, evaluation and reporting. 
To enhance both the coherence of UN activities at 
country level and the leadership of the governments, 
two existing tools will be strengthened: the United 
Nations Development Action Framework (UNDAF) 
and the Resident Coordinator system. 
UNDAFs define the strategic framework for the entire 
UN development system in a given country. By simpli­
fying and enhancing this tool, interagency consisten­
cy and efficiency in planning is expected to improve. 
Equally, there was consensus on strengthening the 
position of Resident Coordinators by better financial 
and organizational support as well as by extending 
their competences in programming and planning. 
To be effective, these efforts have to coincide with 
organizational changes within UN agencies. There­
fore, the QCPR advocates for a greater decentraliza­
tion of authority to field representatives.
Funding of operational activities: Full cost recov­
ery of all non-core funded activities is mandatory for 
UN Funds and Programmes. Thus trust funds and 
multi-bilateral projects have to cover the overhead 
costs they incur to the UN institution they are as­
sociated with. For this purpose and as a first step, a 
standard charge of 8 per cent on earmarked finan­
cial contributions has recently been agreed upon by 
the governing bodies of the Funds and Programmes, 
which means that Boards have already acted upon 
one of the mandates given by the QCPR in 2012.
Donors are planned to be incentivized to raise the 
level and predictability of their core financial contri­
butions. Finally, UN Funds and Programmes are held 
accountable for using similar systems of cost classifi­
cation and control.
Harmonization of business practices: At head­
quarters and regional levels, harmonization of poli­
cies, rules and procedures is planned to be continued 
in the area of support services (e.g. finance, human 
resources, procurement and information technology 
management). At country level, common frame­
works for budgeting and service provision are to be 
introduced. 
Results-based management and evaluation: 
There was agreement on setting stronger incentives 
for streamlined and coherent results-based man­
agement. To strengthen accountability for results, 
frameworks based on measurable indicators will be 
established. Further objectives include facilitating in­
dependent system-wide evaluation and strengthen­
ing recipient countries’ monitoring capacities. 
Photo credits: 
United Nations Development Programme / Saikat Mukherjee 
THE ROLE OF SWITZERLAND 
Switzerland as a facilitator, 
promoter and convener
Making the UN system more effective and efficient 
is one of the main goals of Switzerland at the United 
Nations. Thanks to continuous efforts to promote and 
facilitate processes supporting reform at the global 
policy level and in its priority countries, Switzerland is 
considered as a country strongly committed to enhanc­
ing the capacity of the UN system to deliver results.
Facilitating the negotiations: For the past 10 
years, Switzerland has assumed the role of facilitator 
of the QCPR negotiations (2004, 2007, 2012) as well 
as of the resolutions of the ECOSOC monitoring the 
implementation of the QCPR. Prior to the intergov­
ernmental negotiations and in collaboration with UN 
agencies and the UN Secretariat, Switzerland helped 
build the basis for an informed dialogue and was 
then assigned the task of achieving consensus in the 
negotiations. As facilitator, it had a key role in mak­
ing possible the positive outcome of the 2012 QCPR. 
This active role in the QCPR process considerably en­
hanced the visibility and good reputation of Switzer­
land in the United Nations. 
Promoting the implementation of the QCPR is a 
priority objective of Switzerland at the UN. Continu­
ous effort by the entire UN development system and 
by member states will be needed to put into practice 
what was agreed upon. In monitoring the implemen­
tation of these intergovernmental decisions, the Unit­
ed Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs 
(UN DESA) plays a crucial role. UN DESA, through the 
UN Secretary General, issues the most important re­
ports on the implementation of the QCPR which are 
discussed in the ECOSOC sessions. It also is the main 
provider of expertise to member states.

---

Reform of the United Nations Development System    APRIL 2013    
4
Switzerland will continue to support UN DESA for an 
effective implementation of the reforms. In addition, 
implementing the QCPR is actively advocated by 
Switzerland through its membership in the govern­
ing bodies of UN organizations. 
At country level, Switzerland is actively supporting 
the implementation of the “Delivering as One” ap­
proach and of the QCPR. This includes support to ef­
forts to increase coordination between different UN 
organizations. Switzerland also sponsored events fa­
cilitating the exchange of experiences between Resi­
dent Coordinators as well as between countries that 
have adopted the “Delivering as One” model. Impor­
tant lessons learnt and recommendations based on 
field experiences came out of these workshops and 
fed into the QCPR debate.
“One UN” in Vietnam: 
Switzerland’s contribution 
Vietnam was one of eight pilots to first implement 
the “Delivering as One” approach and is now among 
the most advanced countries in reorganizing the UN 
country presence. 
Following a strong demand for more coherence by 
the Vietnamese government, the first “One Plan” 
was adopted for 2006-2010. In a participative pro­
cess, common expected results, joint strategies to 
achieve them and responsibilities of both the gov­
ernment and the 14 UN organizations then present 
in the country were defined. 
A subsequent “One Plan Management Plan” speci­
fied the implementation of the “Delivering as One” 
model in Vietnam. The UN agencies started to work 
together in issue-specific “Programme Coordination 
Groups” and began to pool operational support ser­
vices e.g. in the fields of procurement, travel, training 
or security. 
Switzerland participated in financing this first phase 
of Vietnam’s “One UN” pilot initiative. An independ­
ent evaluation found that the Swiss involvement has, 
inter alia, enhanced results orientation, helped to in­
crease efficiency through harmonized reporting and 
contributed to empowering the UN Resident Coor­
dinator. 
Today, the now 16 UN agencies in Vietnam are co­
operating ever more closely. They defined 12 com­
mon result objectives to be pursued by 12 thematic 
inter-agency teams. This substantial step towards 
more efficiency, coherence and effectiveness will be 
facilitated by a common “One UN House” accom­
modating all 16 organizations. Switzerland is not 
only financially supporting the construction of these 
premises but will also actively contribute to the im­
plementation of the new “One Plan” for 2012-2016. 
Reform priorities of Switzerland 
In promoting the implementation of the 2012 QCPR, 
Switzerland is focusing on the following priorities.
Coordination of operational activities
•	 Accelerate the consolidation of the “Delivering as 
One” approach
•	 Further establish the United Nations Development 
Action Framework (UNDAF) as a strategic instru­
ment negotiated between UN agencies and gov­
ernments 
•	 Enhance the function and authority of Resident 
Coordinators. Ensure the funding of RC systems 
through a predictable financing mechanism.
Harmonization of business practices 
•	 Unify rules, policies and procedures in all function­
al areas mentioned in the QCPR 
•	 Further harmonize business practices, which in­
cludes common premises and common services 
(procurement, ICT infrastructure, human resourc­
es, harmonized approach to cash transfers)
Funding of operational activities
•	 Monitor the outcome of the recently adopted cost 
recovery frameworks from core and non -core fi­
nancial resources
•	 Set effective incentives to achieve sustainable and 
high levels of core financial contributions 
•	 Incentivize donors to make more predictable long-
term financial commitments 
Results-based management and evaluation
•	 Replace most agency-specific reports at country 
level by common reporting on system-wide results 
Contact
SDC Global Institution Division:
global.institutions@deza.admin.ch